My name is Peng
I live in Indianapolis
I go to school at Indiana University
I am also well, thank you
Where are they now?
My paycheck will not be in until next week
Why didn't you argue when you could?
It is a lie!
My leg hurts
Her mouth is small
they were rubbing their eyes
My sister's hair is long.
he bit his tongue
How are you?
What are you going to do today?
I saw a man crying yesterday
He does not know my mother's name
when there are clouds, we cannot see the moon
he has a wound on his arm
I do not know when I'll be returning.
I will not be able to see anything
he is scratching his nose
There are a lot of stars tonight
your child cry a lot
your father killed a snake
Go to our house
What are you going to do?
Are you going to the store?
Do you need help?
Are you hurt?
where does it hurt?
Do you need a doctor?
Where are you bleeding?
You need to see a doctor.
The doctor will be right with you.
My head hurts.
I am nauseous.
I broke a bone.
I strained a muscle. 
I am bleeding.
I cut myself accidentally.
I hit my head.
I was in a car accident.
What is the patient's name?
What is your date of birth?
What is your height?
What is your weight?
Do you have any food allergies?
Do you have any drug allergies?
What kind of reaction to the allergen do you have?
What is your primary language?
Do you need a translator?
Have you been hospitalized in the last year?
Do you have an open wound?
Do you have diarrhea?
If we are unable to speak with you because of your illness, who should we contact?
Have you ever received blood or blood products?
Are you pregnant or menstruating?
When was your last menstrual period?
How many times have you been pregnant?
How many children do you have?
Do you have diabetes?
Do you live alone?
Do you care for someone ill in the home?
Who will be helping you with your care when you leave the hospital?
Describe your living conditions. (What kind of home do you live in?)
Do you have needs to obtain your medication?
Is there any assistive equipment you use at home?
Do you need assistance to change positions?
Have you fallen in the last 2 to 4 weeks?
Do you snore most nights? ( do you snore every night?)
Do you have any dietary restrictions?
Do you have any urination problems?
Are you constipated?
Have you had a recent major change in your life?
Have you had a recent significant loss in your life?
Have you had a recent major stressor in your life?
How do you cope with stress, loss, or change?
Would you like us to assist you with any needs related to your religious, spiritual, or cultural practices?
Do you feel safe in your relationships at home?
Do people smoke in your home?
Are you having thoughts of taking your own life?
Did you bring valuables with you?
What anxieties, questions, fears, or concerns do you have (about your healthcare)?
Would you like any limitations on visitors, TV, or phone calls?
Please fill out an (admission/intake) entry form.
What is the first illness the patient has? (What are the patient's current primary diagnoses?)
What is your doctor's (primary physician's) name?
What is the name of your health insurance plan?
Do you have any special needs that we should be aware of?
What is the name of your employer?
On this form write the name of the doctor who sent you here.
What is your method of payment?
Why did you come here today? (Like, what brought you here?)
When did you first experience these symptoms?
How did the accident happen?
What is your preferred pharmacy?
Have you ever felt this pain before?
Please indicate the level of pain you are in.
What makes your pain worse?
What makes your pain better?
Do you think your pain is caused by something different or more serious than what your doctor has told you?
What is your employment status?
What is your marital status?
What was the date of your last phyisician visit?
When was the onset of injury or illness?
Have you ever seen a naturopathic doctor (a doctor who uses herbs/natural methods to heal)?
Are you presently being treated for a medical condition?
What treatment have you tried for relief of this issue?
Please briefly describe any chronic pain.
Please briefly note any medical history or trauma history that you would like to further discuss.
Please describe the foods you eat regularly.
Do you exercise regularly?
What type of exercise do you do?
What illnesses run in your family?
Are you currently taking any medications?
Are you currently taking any vitamins?
Are you currently taking any herbs?
Where did you last receive health-related services?
Are you deaf or hard of hearing?
What is your estimated household income?
What is your racial identity?
What is your highest level of education?
Have you ever been arrested or been in jail or prison?
How often do you brush your teeth (weekly)?
How often do you floss?
How often do you use mouthwash?
Do you ever have pain or sensitivity in any of your teeth?
What time is your appointment?
When was your last dental exam?
When your mother was pregnant with you, were there any complications during the pregnancy or birth?
Have you ever smoked cigarettes?
What is your father's occupation?
What is your mother's occupation?
Did your parents divorce?
Describe your father and your relationship with him.
Describe your mother and your relationship with her.
How long have you held your present position?
Have you ever served in the military?
Do you have any pending legal problems?
Do you belong to a particular religion or spiritual group?
Is there anything else you would like us to know?
What position are you applying for?
What is your available start date?
What is your desired pay?
Have you ever worked for this company?
What is your employment history?
How many hours can you work weekly?
Can you perform the essential functions of this job with or without reasonable accomodation?
List any special skills or experience that you feel would help you in the position you are applying for.
Please list three professional references not related to you.
May we contact your present employer?
Have you ever applied here before?
Are you 18 years of age or older?
What machines or equipment can you operate that relate to the job for which you are applying?
Have you ever been fired from a job or asked to resign?
Where did you hear about this job?
When are you available for an interview?
What restaurants are in my area?
Where is the closest coffeeshop?
Where can I buy bandaids?
How do I get to the grocery store?
Can you give me directions?
What will the weather be like today?
Should I wear a jacket?
Is it going to rain today?
How do I get to the closest hospital?
call the police
Do you have plans tomorrow?
Are you hungry?
Take a left turn at the gas station.
I don't know where he is going.
This dog is big
This dog is cha sing a cat
like those books
That white cat over there is cute
There are a lot of people who went
Your phone is on that desk by you
that video (movie) sounds good
Peng started to sleep
The book on the desk is red
You are about to step in dung
We will do it.
Wouldn't it be this way.
There is a wound on my ear
This is white
I'm white.
This cat is white
These cats are white
The cats are old
Those cats are old
Those cats are black.
Your shirt is whiter than my shirt.
I am older than you.
Bawi started sleeping.
When we just started sleeping, the phone rang.
Bawi made Chin go to sleep.
This man is a doctor.
It is I who saw you.
It is you who I saw.
It is he who saw you.
The dog chased the cat.
THe cat chased the dog.
The dogs chased the cat.
The dogs chased the cats.
Only she went.
It is only I who saw you
Only I saw you
Only Ceu saw you.
Ceu only saw you.
I gave him water.
I gave Bawi a book.
He gave Chin a book
I will give Chn a book.
Chinchin was given a book/They gave chin a book
He gave his book to Chin
Bawi gave Chin's books away
Bawi gave me Chin's book.
I gave Bawi Chin's book.
Where did you tie the cow?
Why did you tie the cow?
When did you tie the cow
Who tied the cow?
He gave you a candy
They gave him a candy
He gave them a candy
They gave you a candy
We gave you a candy
Y'all gave us a candy
I hit y'all
I am going to hit y'all
They hit you
They are going to hit you
The boy kissed your mom
The boy is going to kiss your mom
Your mom hit the boy
Your mom is going to hit the boy
You hit them with a stick
You are going to hit them with a stick
She gave me a candy
What kind of candy did your mom give you?
the dog chased the cat
the dog is cha sing two white cats
the monkey woke up
the monkey woke up yesterday
last year a man built a house
the monkey who woke up yesterday is small
monkey are small
the monkey who just woke up is small
I traveled to Indiana last week
we do not have bread after last week
I did not have bread last week
next year Abawi will build a house
next week I will finish school
Kam Lo will build a house next week
After I eat I will go to bed
after last week I didn’t have bread
after two weeks I will leave Chinland
have you ever eaten a mango
Did you eat mango
I read a book yesterday
A long time ago, the man built the house
I dropped my necklace
I wrote
the soccer ball was rolling
it's very windy
I caught a lot of lobsters
he punished a thief
I worshipped
I breathed out
I spit
a drunk fell over
he spilled the water
I ran
he wore clothes
I stood up
he lied to his friend
I fixed it
I woke up my friend
I planted a tree
I sang a song
he rolled the ball
the rice is delicious
the water spilled
the child woke up but was still sleepy
because the door opened he closed it
he tripped but he didn’t care
he shattered the window, didn’t he?
did he shut the window?
his sandals fell but he didn’t care
did he shatter the window?
the rope came untied but he didn’t care
the rabbit disappeared and the child cried
the door opened but no one came in
because he tripped he cried
because his house burned down he cried
his sandals snapped but he didn’t care
the ball was rolling but the dog didn’t chase it
did you open the door?
because his sandals fell he cried
the window shattered but he didn’t care
he opened the door, didn’t he?
because he was limping he cried
he shut the window, didn’t he?
he was limping but he didn’t care
did he cut down the tree?
he snapped the sandal, didn’t he?
after the child woke up, he ate
did he untie the rope?
he woke the child up, didn’t he?
did he burn the house down?
because the window shattered he cried
did he roll the ball?
he burned the house down, didn’t he?
did he drop his watch?
because the rope came untied he tied it again
did he wake up the child?
because his pencil snapped he cried
His house burned down but he didn’t care
because the ball was rolling the dog chased it
did he snap the pencil?
he dropped his pencil, didn’t he?
because the rabbit disappeared the child cried
he rolled the ball, didn’t he?
he cut down the tree, didn’t he?
he untied the rope, didn’t he?
my father goes to the field
you should not make fun of him just because he stammers
he/she stammers
after getting old, his mind is quite dumb
he cannot open his mouth
he stays at home
he goes to school
a piece of broken glass cuts me
we slice bread with a knife
we shall be happy if you can come
I know whom I believe
no one can come/no one is allowed to come
he will represent us at the meeting
he looked at me with his open mouth
I have handed over the money to him
his acnes are killing him (i.e. make him ugly) !
he does not want to invite me for dinner
you woke up the baby because you shouted too much
don't let your pig make too much noise
open your eyes please!
although they opened their eyes they can not really see
my in-laws invited me for a dinner
there is a hole in the wall
he passes the examination
rock your baby to sleep
I still remembered the time when you put flower wreath around my neck
I would like to be just for you
he cannot run on account of the pain in his leg
we used envelope to send letters
your shin bone is too hard
he had already gone home
I am going to go to the field now
I do not know whether it is my dream or my consciousness (wake)
fell from the tree and I was unconscious for a moment
he cried as soon as his mother left him
because it was raining we made popcorn inside
there are too many leeches in the way to your farm
my father got a bald head after he got old
my mother is praying
the pastor prayed for us
as soon as he became rich the way he talked has changed
my grandmother dried cotton in the sun
do not bother me while I am writing
I am looking after a sick person at the hospital
demands of me of the debt I owe him
they let him pay fines at the court
my father bought a house for me
I was so tired that I cannot make any movement
you will fall from the bed if you move too much
when the soldiers move about, they are dangerous
he catches a living coal with a pair of tongs
he splitted woods with my ax
he wets his pants
she cut my hair with scissors
yesterday I worked too hard and today I am very tired
the sun dazzles my eyes
your flashlight does not give me enough light
do not stick out your tongue
they sit next to one another/ they exhange seat
they are pounding sticky rice for Easter
they have made the decision
join the rope where you broke it off
he sticks out his tongue at me (in contempt)
he spits on me (to show his contempt of me)
although I was not able to counter his words I still did not agree with him
he came to confront me over (something), and we quarreled
I am going to go and pay back my debt
I have paid all my debt
it is quite hard to live when we are too poor
it is quite hard to sleep without pillow
he gives me more rice
a branch fell on me while I was picking fruits
because he did not want to pay marriage price they had some problem
I caused my younger brother to be so angry that he did not want to speak to me anymore
their village road is not very good for walking
as for me you are as beautiful as 'chawhnawn' flower
leaves are falling as summer appears
this is the place where my love and I talked
my friend called me over the telephone this morning
I shot birds with a sling shot
ashes got into my eyes when I blew the fire
I cannot study since they were too noisy
I attend school every day
you shall not curse other
I cannot remember what he said
he would like to do more what is forbidden
they just walked on the road
A ghost pull my legs yesterday
cow dung is the best manure
He climbs the wall and they support him by pushing his buttocks
they look similar beacuse they are twins
they use chaff for pig's food
Please visit me at least once a year
feeds the chicken with corn
The foundation of the house must be firm
I want to ask you to repair my TV
he kicked a stone and his nail all peeled off
I do not think it will be possible to be friend with him
he is a friend of mine
a mother teases her child
I crave for meat as I just recovered from my illness
my mother used to wait for me from the gate of our house
my small knife is so sharp that it is convenient to use it
he is not that jealous of his wife
since we have too many visitors our foods are gone
Let there be peace in our country
I am very excited to go out tomorrow
Your mom wore your cloth yesterday
My brother farted while we were eating.
I injured my work associate at work
My friend is sick and went to the hospital
I am going to church
I will not be able to work because i am sick
I am going to travel
lock the door when you leave
I will rest
the woman cry alone
A young girl is lost
You have the right to remain silent
Anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law
You have the right to have an attorney.
If you cannot afford an attorney, one will be appointed to you by the court.
With these rights in mind, are you still willing to talk with me about the charges against you?
What was the type of offense or incident?
What was the specific location of the incident?
When exactly did the incident take place?
Was your vehicle stolen or vandalized?
What was the value of the vehicle?
Please describe the incident
Has the suspect been identified?
Could you describe the suspect?
What kind of crime would you like to report?
Do you want to press charges?
Are you reporting a traffic accident or a crime?
Were there any other parties involved?
What is the name of the investigating officer?
We are going to collect eye-witness testimonies.
Write here all the details of the incident.
What actions did you take after the incident?
You will have to appear in court.
Can you testify in court?
What was the nature of the incident?
Has anyone been arrested so far in relation to the incident?q
Do you want the police to get in touch with you?
What factors led to the incident?
Were there any witnesses to the event?
Was anyone injured?
Was medical treatment provided?
Where is my lawyer?
I will not speak until my lawyer is present.
We have arrested a suspect.
We will let you know once we have a lead on the case.
Two fish are in a tank and one says to the other, "do you know how to drive this thing?"
The invisible man turned down the job because he just couldn't see himself doing it.
Well done is better than well said
If we shouldn't eat at night, why do they put a light in the fridge?
A lot of people cry when they cut onions, but the trick is to not form an emotional bond.
The origins of the term comedy are found in Ancient Greece.
Only I can change my life. 
A computer once beat me at chess, but it was no match for me at kickboxing.
I went to buy some camouflage pants, but I couldn't find any.
it's a chicken
She picked up an object from the box and held it out to Suiku
Look at that!
there's a picnic table
You can sit some people down here
can you take him out?
do you want to go for a ride? (car)
he's going to go for a ride with the children (car)
she drives the car in front of Chinku
there's a table and there's some chairs
there's a little boy
She reached into the box
shall we go eat?
let's go eat
the dog is going to eat first
here comes the little girl
what's in there?
My mom put the ball in her palm
where does it go?
she spoke very softly.
shall we clean the box?
will you stack the blocks for me?
she started building a tower but it fell
what did you say?
she picked up the chicken and held it out to her mother.
she pointed to the car
are they going to leave?
where did others went?
can you buy another one?
do you want to go to bed?
can you put the baby to bed?
they examined the car carefully
A man is sitting in the chair
what else do we have?
let seat around the table.
should we eat at the table?
what do you want me to do?
should we climb the ladder?
look at this little boy!
can you climb the ladder?
why don't you let him climb the ladder?
she pointed to the ground
can we put this inside?
Mom is going to put this inside the house.
isn't that good?
are those all the people?
is that a dog?
what holiday is today?
do you see Thangthang anywhere?
Try the other door.
Those are very hard.
the baby smiled at her mother.
Enter through that door.
The boy was frustrated.
She looked inside the box
she reached inside the box
Look on the outside.
Where is the ball?
You found it.
Where did you go?
What did you find?
Dad is at home.
Let's see if we can build a tower.
Try to prevent the tower from falling.
The tower fell again.
Can you open the door?
She put the money in a wallet.
What sound does a chicken make?
That's what the chickens say.
They have two dogs.
The child put a ball in a room
He has a big bed.
Peng went into the restroom.
He'll be back in a few minutes.
Did you see all of these little things?
This is my grandma.
Can you give the people chairs to sit on?
Can you find a chair?
The lady sat on a chair.
Should we play with dolls?
We are not going to open the box from the top.
Put down the box.
We have many cups.
she doesn't like the orange chair, but she does like the green one.
Which toys do you want to play with?
Where is the owl?
What else can fit in this box?
Can you do it by yourself?
Where did you put the ladder?
If I use the ladder, I can reach the top shelf.
This ladder is broken.
Lean the ladder against the house.
Put the ladder here.
Where are the chickens?
Where do the chickens sleep?
Some of the chickens are nice, but some are mean.
What did you do after you woke up this morning?
Do you drive your car every day?
We went for a long car ride this morning.
Do you often watch a soccer game?
You sure are making a lot of noise.
We need to clean the house.
Mother pursed her lips and smiled.
Is Grandma coming to our house today?
I thought that was a dog.
Who is AaThang standing next to?
What is the baby's name?
Here come AaThang's chickens.
The chickens ran towards ChinChin.
Here comes a dog.
She covered her mouth in surprise.
You should go the other way!
Watch what you're doing!
She'll be back later.
You can do it.
Don't worry about that.
Fold your clothes so they don't wrinkle.
Where is the dog going?
She showed us how to cook her favorite dish.
Do you want me to do it for you?
Can I borrow some money?
She will pay us back.
What fruit is ripe right now?
Did you hear a scary sound?
She put the baby on the bed.
Where does the baby sleep?
What do you want to eat for dinner?
We will prepare the rice.
The fruit is all rotten.
He has seven chickens.
Do you see what is in her hands?
If you are not careful, the vase will break.
The vase is fragile.
Can you count the chickens?
We had fun playing with the chickens.
Do you want to swim in the river?
The old man sat on his front porch.
We used to walk along the river.
The man fell to the floor.
Some of these plants are edible, and some are medicinal.
Do you think anyone will answer the door if we knock?
They bought a new car.
Have you seen their new car?
The stairs are not sturdy, so be careful.
She was sitting down.
Please empty the box.
The children picked up their toys before the guests arrived.
Our neighbor's dog howls very loudly.
She had to leave, but she will return.
I just want to play soccer
He is sad that his mom left him
The white shirt is too big.
The child imitated her mother.
Is your shirt orange or red?
I am ready to eat.
The little girl was sleepy.
They want a bigger house, but they don't need one.
The child hid under the bed.
Let's play with these toys here.
We haven't opened this box yet.
We'll play chess later.
I'll bet you can carry everything all by yourself.
I need to go to the bank first.
The bank closed an hour ago.
The bank is not open on Sundays.
What time does the shop open?
She used to be taller than me.
If you lock the door, I won't be able to get in.
He didn't listen to his mother.
You have to stand up.
I will fix them tomorrow
Will you share your food with me?
Can you tell me where my shoe is?
Will all of the people fit in one car?
Look what you did!
You have to be smart
Is that a chicken?
What do you do?
let's make a bonfire
I heard a noise, but I think it was just a cat.
How long is the drive from your house to my house?
Why don't you ask him to help you?
Are you going to drive in the house?
They have to walk slowly.
Is he going to sleep now?
Where did all the people go?
The baby was crying because she wanted her mother.
Does the man want to go to the store?
Why doesn't he go to the store?
Where is the store?
Our door broke during the storm.
I dont know how to sing
Do you want to play with this?
I was right the first time.
Look at the puppies playing!
Would you like to play with us?
She rummaged through her bag to find what she was looking for.
Let's bring the dog in the house.
Do you like the rain?
Is the old lady cooking?
I want to sleep early for tomorrow exam.
Maybe they can cook some dinner.
Will you share your mango with me?
Don't be mad at me.
What did you have for dinner?
There is enough food for everyone.
Is this what you wanted?
Do you know the names of those two stars?
Don't be surprised.
They watched her walk out the door.
We will be catching frogs at Faarva brook tonight.
Frogs were jumping on the rocks as if they were having a party.
They climbed up the path toward the farm.
The countless stars seemed to celebrate the quiet night.
The dew hung from the full-grown rice stalks, making it impossible to pass through without getting soaked.
After they finished the hard day's work, they went to bed beside their children.
The family looked like they were preparing to hold a big feast.
The moon rose from behind the mountain.
The paddy bore more grains than expected.
The moon shone on the dew that had fallen at midnight, making each droplet bright and beautiful.
The noises of cutting and falling trees vibrated across the banks of the streams.
I heard that there are tracks of deer
As they sang, they danced slowly round and round.
Pa Cung was gazing at the sky and often sighed heavily.
Their pinewood torch flamed bright.
When they talked about the Christmas that they were looking forward to so much, they forgot about all other things.
The faint sound of water flowing beneath the hut lulled them to sleep.
It was so cold that their teeth were chattering.
There were more people in the town than usual because it was just before Christmas.
Christmas decorations at stores and large shops enlivened the spirit of the people. 
after our net got severed, we returned home
we used envelope to send letters
he studied at Mondalay
after he became an officer, it is rather hard to talk to him
he has come of age
our corns are getting overriped now ("they are hard now")
he had already gone home
I have already gone to bed
I am going to go to the field now
if it is profitable to you please do it
he can no longer move about
I don't know the one who helped me when I was unconscious
have you ever dug crabs?
I fell from the tree and I was unconscious for a moment
we will make terraces on the mountain and grow things
you need to make a move
we shall play king (game)
my grandfather presented to me the first fruit of his harvest
because it was raining we made popcorn inside
are there many 'cangpin' rats in your farm?
there are too many leeches in the way to your farm
don't get involved !
he is very fast in running
her mother reprimanded her
Mawite sometimes works as an interpreter
when you make feast over the killing of a tiger you need to follow tradition
my father got a bald head after he got old
I can't just resist your beauty
he wooed her since he cannot resist her beauty
he killed her by his magic
we celebrate his birthday anniversary
my mother is praying
the pastor prayed for us
you represent your father ("you are considered in the place of your father")
who will come for your place
as soon as he became rich the way he talked changed
are you as tall as your Dad yet?
it's now time to go
have you ever printed anything?
we roofed our house with corrugated roofing sheets
we wallowed amidst the straws when we were kids
dry season caused to dry up our source of water
could you please mail this letter for me?
a rope breaks
he is not wise although he is educated
please write a sentence
please hand me a sheet of paper
I have been able to write a bit these days
he looks upward and prays
I thought I heard something but when I looked up I did not see a thing
he gulped a cup of wine
please do not bother me while I am writing
he is blind
do not imitate after me
the Chin value the Chin traditional blanket very much
I alarmed a quail while it was scratching the ground, and it flew away leaving me behind
we saw a snake while we were digging stones
do you want to stir your stew?
fire burned my hand when I stirred the curry
I have not been able to demand repayment of debt
milk is a good vitamin
he cannot pay enough fine for his fault
the one who is borrowing money from the bank is my elder brother
he pricks out a thorn with a needle
we used a mug to take a bath
my father bought a house for me
a cowboy herded cows
I was so tired that I cannot make any movement
you will fall from the bed if you move too much
we transported fire wood with a bullock cart
when they made liquor they usually put in yeast
he gets up and goes away immediately
do not shoot down the bird which feeds her babies
I have been feeding him for three months
I viewed our town from the mountain above our town
I clip live-coals with tongs
fox and bird have their own nest
let your temper be like a snail walk!
oyster is very tasty
she cut my hair with scissors
his eyes squint
as for him, he can endure scolding
you are the prettiest in my eyes
if you (the best) behave this way, how would others do
the master bed in Chin house was made by the best wood they can find
it has been raining continuously for three days
before he competes for wrestling he always fed himself with meat and rice
you are just like this!
we made a trap for mouse using mouse trap
a squirrel runs, his child is small
we cut clothes with scissors
it is quite hard to open one's eyes when the sun is too bright
when the army parades they are harmonious
the sun dazzles my eyes
the road is muddy
your room is light
it's now dawn ("the cosmos is now light")
we started travelling at the very early dawn ("as soon as there was light")
please stand where the light is bright
you must not spit
do not stick out your tongue
they sit next to one another
can you help me carry my burden? ("can you relieve me of my burden?")
I have no reliever ("successor")
our cow breaks its rope
he can snap a vine-rope and he is very gratified
they have made the decision
have you ever shot birds with catapult?
a horse is galloping
he shot a bird with a catapult
they live above our house
next generation will be more knowledgable
he gives me more rice
do you still have anything to add?
a branch fell on me while I was picking fruits
as to this matter they cannot make their decision yet
because he did not want to pay marriage price they had some problem
will he be able to succeed his father in his work?
their village road is not very good for walking
the wind blows it away
this is the place where my love and I talked
he might pass on his habit to you, be careful
it is not good to speak to people without respect and care
his house is two story
it would be vey bad if you gloried too much in your education
they migrated to another village 
he rolls down the steep place
the hills are steep
he throws a stone at the chicken
he casts net on the fish
he whips me with a stick
the police checked all out belongings
we used bullock cart for the means of transportation
a bear can also be killed by a 'chel' trap
these days when I do not go to the field I just stay home
please blow the fire
ashes got into my eyes when I blew the fire
we used bamboo tube to blow fire
can you cast a net?
He uses stone to scare away birds
he hurts his hand while he was chiseling a stone
his foot length is quite long
I will use this log as a stepping woodblock
you are noisy
I cannot study since they were too noisy
after he got deaf it was hard for him to live
he splits wood lengthwise
be careful when you split wood, otherwise you might get hurt
when churches split up good friends also depart from one antoher
we should have a mind of sharing
don't turn your ear on me
have you set up your trap?
he is fetching water that is sacred
the things that he left behind is a basket
the chief clan also married to the commoner
he swears that he did not steal
you shall not curse
his shirt sleeve is so short that it looks like a short-sleeve shirt
you have a lot of hiccups, ha!
because I am too full my hiccough comes out
they filled up the grave with dirt
he has foretold ("tell ahead of time") what had happened here
they demolished their old house because they wanted to build a new house
it is that easy to teach
it is better
I told him not to go but he went further
he would like to do more what is forbidden
would you be able to put the lid on the pot?
please close your eyes
you should put lid on the medicine bottle
the reason why he cried was because he was so sorry
it's difficult to go up hill
the road is ascending(lit. going upward)
the road is steep upward
my stomach is upset
I cannot study since my stomach is upset
he bothered us
they just walked on the road
I am not going to stay very long ("I am going to go in no time")
I shall not have time to sit down, I shall be leaving soon
I helped him two days
as he was showing off his watch he lost it
she shows off her clothes at the feast
in what year were you born?
have you taken out your parcel?
please come and eat with us on my birthday
has your baby been born yet?
I feel nausea ("my vomit is going out")
there are many people left who cannot go out of Burma
I shall cook food for you
my dear mother cooked me rice and meat
you burden us with heavy things
will you be able to watch over our house during all my absence?
I dared you as much as you dared me
please go ahead
he cannot grow well because he has round worms
have you ever tried turtle meat?
many Chin like animal entrails
would you please buy me some entrails at the market?
the road is quite steep downward
have you sterilized your pig? ("take out the womb")
I am going to cook food
there are plenty of mist at the Ṭong river in the morning
what do you cook for lunch?
when rainbow came out people said that the rain will stop
they pierced him in his ribs with a spear
it would be very nice if you can reach us before noon
as for today it will rain afternoon
when the world come to an end there will be eclipse of the sun
do you have apple's seed?
how can you like the food which others have already touched?
we receive benifits of lords
I soak my clothes (for washing)
your fire is about to die off there!
it is good to do things with thorough thinking
if you wear your shirt while it is wet you may catch cold
while you are stewing please also cook food
there are not many oysters in our country
your salt is lumpy since it is not ground into fine pieces
demands of me of the debt I owe him
milk is a good vitamin
a hawk catches a small chicken
Peter loans $50 to Matthew
The way they treat (acclaim) us is so good that we feel a bit embrassed
my cow is different from your cow
There is another person in the house
let there be peace in our land
You should not be negligent to your studies
you should not neglect your children
How are you?
I am quite healthy
My wound has healed
Exercise is good for health
This medicine is good for the healing of your wound
Doctor heals the sick
Malaria medicine is needed for the healing of your malaria
It's hard to swallow his teaching
Unwillingness to get an education is our biggest enemy.
Have you inquired about going to college?
I will visit you when I get better
A dog chase me
we will start out journey as soon as dawn breaks
Because he is so thin he cannot eat much either
He blocked my view becuase he stood in front of me
My weakness makes them to gloat over
They also prayed to the gods when they made sacrifice to them
You should have pity on us becuase we took refuge in you
Pray when you are weak
Small birds cannot fly soon after they open their eyes
Tone down your voice
we saw a snake while we were daming water
it has not been very long since we know how to use spoon for eating
we will go home when we finish our discussion
because she has a good body she is a pretty lady
you go ahead and I shall follow you
the magician man casts a spell on her and let her marry him
a snake swallowed a frog
we would appreciate it if you don't hinder our work even if you don't want to help us
Would you like to eat?
Does his bowel move?
Yellow cloth is beautiful
Do not enroach the boundary of my field
When your funds are exhausted, I will give you more money
We will eat food
Foodstuff are more and more scarce in our land
since we have too many visitors our foods are gone
Do not exploit others
cow dung is good manure
if your bowel does not move eat plenty of vegetables
her thigh is so pretty
they are always arguing
do not reject my request
it is not easy to be around them as they argue alot
do you happen to have any money?
did you ever go to England?
have you toasted the cake?
I warm my hands at the fire
we roast meat
if you encroach on the boundary of my field, I shall take you to court
why are you nudging me all the time
she confined herself inside the house (i.e., she does not go out very much)
we plant rice seeds
he always bargains when he buys things
if you are given a positive answer to your asking of the hand of a girl, that's good
I will visit you guys after I have dinner
our dog has youngsters and she is very protective
they look similar because they are twins
please bring one string of thread
please visit me one time every year
there are sixty beads in one string (of beads)
he does not want to scold his child
my leg is painful
she adorns in gold and silver
I am suffering from malaria
those who have beautiful daughters always run out of lighting materials
he had four sons and they all finished college
we will gather pine wood
his house is pretty small
my work is easy
I can do my job with ease
you said that you will come but you did not
have you rinsed your mouth
the foundation of the house must be firm
he chips his tooth for sucking the sugar cane
these days people do not use lance anymore
diligent people enjoy the fruit of their diligence
her skirt's hem is torn
she puts on a skirt
he was carried away by the water and died
he chews and sucks the juice of sugarcane
you should consolidate what you said
I am constipated
the cry of 'fiakfairok' brings about lonesome feeling
I am tired of him because he asked me to do too much
they sifted sands with sieve and sold them
your meat is insipid
since your wine is too diluted no one want to drink it
be careful when you put things away
I found a letter from my Dad while I was packing my books
the water is clean and clear
the sky is clear there will no rain
he is conscious now
people love him because he is wise
she eats meat only in a small amount
when the host eat too little curry, visitors have a hard time scooping more curry
thou shalt not steal
if you steal once it will be addicted to you
his nose protrudes
we will suck some sugarcane at the bottom of Sopum village
they said that sugarcane beer is good for one's health
your pants is too long
his sarong is so long that its seam is dragging on the ground
fish spawn in October
fish should not be caught while they are spawning
he beats him with a stick
I am quite successful to sell my goods
his speed is slow
if you work too slow they will not hire you
frogs come out during the rainy season
our umbrellas worn out during the wettest part of the rainy season
as human being there would be spots where we are not successful
since she adorned herself with gold and silver she seemed quite pretty at the first glance
if your waterbucket is leaking you should repair it
he was embarassed for the fact that his house was small
he is quite comfortable at his work because his work is easy
it is not good to encourage people to quarrel
there are always dances when they make a feast over the killing of a tiger
since the sky is clear there will be no rain
after he got sober he went home
I am lonely
you came while I am lonesome
you should exterminate the flies
she hated him so much that she spit on him
yesterday I drank too much and I have a bad hangover today
donot eat anymore if you are so satiated with meat
my blanket is wet
wash your hair while it is wet
we will also go to heaven (for sure)
circik' rat is very stinky
if salt is not put in the meal it does not taste good
it is so enjoyable to participate in conferences
as for me it seems that I cannot win your hand
it is angrysome when one does not get what they consider as their portion
it is my duty to try to win the hand of the one I loved
I also had fetched waters with a hollow bamboo
do you know how to play 'congoih'?
there are also people who change colors like chameleon
do not mix alcohol and medicine
we used earthworms for fish bait
leaven is used when they made liquor
he came but immediately left
if you tastes food too often it will run out
winter impeded the growth of our cabbages
I want to see the landscape from a view point
I would like you to buy me a thing
he cannot go very well since his leg bloats
that village is good
did yo see the snake that bit you?
please fetch the beer with a gourd
the cross that they posted on the hill crest is highly visible
as for me, do not wilt away, my love!
you may compare and contrast who is better between us
I am measuring his weight
his face bloats since he drinks too much
I lift up my eyes to the hill
it is healthy for the lungs to live in the environment of clean air
he is thick-skinned ("his skin is hard")
my grandfather stewed some meat
he is wise since he has visited so many countries
so that he became their leader, have they annointed him with oil on his head?
we have used this field of ours one year and we are going to use it again this year
he cried pounding his chest
why don't you go and see the doctor for having cold all the time?
after I disapponted him so bad, my father did not want to help me anymore
there are plenty of cockroaches in our farmhouse
he is timid
there would be lots of opportunities that he missed because he was unsure of himself
they split woods day and night
the message that my father left us was to love one another
can you make decision between us?
when you judge others (in public court) you shall judge them fairly
there are times when it is hard to believe those who speak too much
his voice is gone because he speak too much
I really like the words that he told us
do not get near to me too close when I cut meat
have you ever dozed while writing?
persons who tease children are the ones who are troublesome
because he is too choosy he cannot find the right woman
because I was too tired I drank a little rice beer
if your cart wheel is too warping it will be more hard to drag along
when he was unable to counter their claim he was embarrassed again
they fought and he pomp up about his clan
the ball rebounced from the wall and hit me
he became sickening when he was too proud of his materials
because he blew the fire too hard the dust got into his eyes
don't bother him while he is chiseling the stones
people detest him because he is so evil
the wall that you put up is not strong
I amost died because I was so worried
he bothered us all the time
they way he greets people is nice
the things that you load on me is too many
please greet my mother for me, my love!
he does not want to respect the ones who are superior to him
I have constipation and I took medicine for stool softener
it is not possible for a cart to go where the road is too steep
we just profit from your goodness! (i.e. we are unable to do the same in return)
his behavior tickled me
he is always as he is a serious person
the rain caused our fire to die off
he often comes whenever we stewed meatbones
did you drink (liquor) because you felt so lonesome?
do not be nearby the road when it slides
do not wear your clothes while it is wet
the rain caused us to be very wet
the salt you grinded was not fine enough and so it is coarse
your calf is so lovely because it is so plump
what is the reason behind your clothes being all shrunk?
his leg looked quite bad as it bloated
I really want you to not wilt away
because his face bloats he looks like he is fat
we went up to the mountain and because we were viewing the scenery we forgot to return home
when he stews meat he always forgets to rekindle the fire, and so his meats are never well done
he sued me to get my farm
Mr. Lian Uk went and visited almost all over Chin hills
you make me desperate
I have a child
In Lai saying, the middle child is as bad as the middle of the farm.
She is the youngest and the dearest of our child
stone is hard
my gums are bleeding
I want to go with you
we write in ink
stone is durable because it is hard
you will scoop the meat with a ladle
when we are sleepy we yawn
if you eat too much mangoes you will get diahrea
he is left in the lurch
she is a greedy woman
please go and ask him a question
hed asks for the hand of a girl
he asks me questions
we should be thirsty for education
it has been two years since I broke ground for this housesite
Mr. Bawi and Ms. Bawi are engaged to one another
do not reserve something that you will not get!
Raltinthang engages Suinawnhliang for marriage
yesterday they formalised their engagement/bethrodal
he is sleepy and he yawns again and again
she is too jealous of her husband
the Chins believe that python can charm and kill human beings
the rain stops
when the rain stops, we will return home from the farm
if you are too ambitious you will be disillusioned with failure ("do not aim for the bone because you might scoop just the liquid")
his teeth are protruding
my job is difficult
in this world we meet different kinds of difficulties
my axe is sharp
my small knife is so sharp that it is convenient to use it
this job is too difficult for me
sneezing is a sign of cold
have you made your fence yet?
my mother used to wait for me from the gate of our house
do not fell tree!
he cut down the tree near his house
if you are sick, you need to go to the doctor
I will ask your help when I need to travel
he always yells at us whenever he gets drunk
how much do you ask for your cow?
the villagers excommunicated him
I crave for meat as I just recovered from my illness
she is a person of fair skin
a mother teases her son
we shall go when the weather clears off
he is a friend of mine
are others friend coming?
he is a close friend of mine for a long time
our house faces the east
please be seated here ("I give you a preference to this seat")
I do not think it will be possible to fellowship with him
please do come when we have a youth fellowship at the church tonight
he stumbled and kicked a stone and his nail all peeled off
the weather clears off ("the comos skins off itself")
a barking deer barks
I am looking for my cow
I found my pen because as I was looking for my watch
English is now the universal language
At least in Chin hills the Chin should speak in Chin
if you crave for meat you ought to eat meat
we shall beat out animals for games
Here you are, take it!
none of us likes to go to hell
many people mill around the mill
they went round the city seven rounds
they round the town many times
a youngman tries persistently to get a girl for marriage
he is persistently trying to get a job
eventhough I called him he does not want to turn his head
we need help
have you spoken everything you need to say ?
our appetites are good that we consume a lot of food these days
if you eat too much food I will not be able to support you
if you can wait for me I shall be thankful
had I known your coming home, I would have welcomed you
could you possibly give me my salary ahead of time?
can you wait for me? ("can you probably wait for me?")
Do you know me?
Oh my love! you don't seem to know how I love you
your cockiness will not benefit you anything
you are familiar with our village
he has knowledge of this tree
we ought to understand one another
we need to have understanding of one another
he did not speak that word in my presence
just between ourselves, the stealing was done by him (lit. just in the presence of ourselve, ..)
do not covet other people's properties
she is so pretty that all of her friends covet her
they put paddy above the hearth for drying
I rely on you
I lean on the back of a chair
if you trample ant's nest they will crawl all over you
he is asleep soundly
we winnow the paddy and the chaffs fly away
I like this book
this is my book
have you ever craved for meat?
I crave for wrestling
he fails the exam and has a sour face
I like this book, make no mistake of it !
we are safe in the house
we arrived home safely
if our freedom is not safe it is not worth living
we need security
please come here
all of them died completely
I sit for so long that my legs are really numb
don't drink unclean water!
have you ever been operated on your stomach?
they got arrested while they were digging out the grave
tomorrow, we shall pick you up at the house you put up
pick up your book when you come
we miss you greatly and remember you fondly
he illness is so serious that he can no longer eat food (i.e. ask for food)
your child was thirsty for milk and it was asking for you
your child missed you so much that she cannot even cry anymore
our baffalo's hide is so thick that bullet cannot penetrate it
in former days there were many tigers in our country
n ancient days there was a man called Noah
I shall wait for you until/till you come
I want to borrow your axe
if you can lend me your book I shall be very appreciative
my water-carrier leaked, and the water penetrated me all wet
you should open your mouth fully when you sing
our village is far away from your village
we live far away from here
police have been investigating his whereabouts
please ask if he is planning to go on tour
when you dig for rats, first, you need to find the secret escape door
this morning I could not wake up early
as for this morning my wife got up way before I woke up
if you forsake your friend, you will regret it
I shall come tomorrow
she gets up and goes
she is charming
I like your food quite a lot
I cannot tolerate his words
he has bad temper
this small lady is ill-tempered
the rim of our pot is broken
please try not to be too touchy over there
she is annoyed
she brought her anger on us all the time
his temper is quite bad
whenever his temper is about be acrid his wife winked at him, and it gets much better
from the time you went we also went
we wanted to go home very very much
our house is a wooden house
Cung Lian is my husband
are you going to bed now?
it rains continuously for three days
let not bad words come out of your mouth
do not close the opening of the can
my appetite is good
please speak to us two or three words, meaning very briefly
he speaks sweet words
you cannot be at two places at one time
I have been asleep
the fire will burn you
they play a game of seeds of Entada sandens (more ea sily a game of acorns)
a falcon picked up our chick
I am busy and so I cannot come
we are ascending the hill
why didn't you come along when we went up the mountain?
it will be harder to live if the prices are going up so much
lots of fishes are gathered at the rapids in the rivers
you miss the point
since his kidneys are not too good they ask him to drink lots of water
have you ever gone to Hakha before?
we will leave you behind if you take too long ("go leaving you behind")
he entangled my leg
what is the wood that you used for your house beams?
I want to smoke ("my mouth's inside is bad")
I have a sore on the side of my mouth and I cannot eat very well
he/she was smacking his/her lips
my father is arriving two days from today
when they swear it is not taken lightly
when he does not change his position, people come to depend on him again
have you rinsed your mouth?
we are unable to make him talk
we find it very difficult to let him talk
he set up a trap (for birds, rats)
we shall eat food
we did not understand what you told us
we shall drive our cattle home
do you want to drive home the cattle now?
it would be the case that the quicker will finish before the slower ones
go one step forward
she was so tired that she cannot even move her leg for one step
he steps forward one step
my appetite is not good
when small rivers dried up fish also died along with it
I am going to kindle a fire
don't forget to read it when you open your book
as their country get bigger, they also become richer
they widen the road
they like to dig the holes of the rat
my back hurts (i.e., the lower part of my back is painful)
we set up a trap at the mouse trail
we put the knife in the scubbard
his head is bald
our mountains are becoming bare as trees are cut without discrimination
we will beat the pods off the stems of beans
I always bring along my dagger to forest
your mother calls you
your yam is very sweet
my best friend becomes my enemy
you and I will take one another as friends
the roads in the Chin Hills are very curvy
I have been looking for my cow but did not find it
there are plently of fruits in Burma
please put in the horse in its shelter
we also can grow maize in Chin hills
I shall hemstitch my blanket
they plan to put together their son and daughter but they did not succeed
the one I copied is not very clear
I have back ache
would you be able to carry my staffs along?
his back is hunched
are you left handed or right handed?
I am sick and tired of you
you will be notorious if others are sick of you
his hair is curly
since his hair is curly he is mistaken sometimes as an Indian
the rat that bore its hole nearby our house is a white rat
have you carved letters at your father's grave stone?
since the road to our village is so curvy it seems like it is longer
since he thought things through in detail we can depend on him
he opened my eyes with his hands
her chin is long
I coughed and my phlegm came out
have you laid the joists?
you may come when your can is filled to the brim
a mother feeds her baby by mou
he constantly teaches and educates him (i.e. he teaches him like feeding with turnips by mouth)
the fact that the water froze indicates that it is really cold
the drunk who block the road over there is my brother
they block the road
the distance from our house to your house is one mile
we are beating out the animals in this area for games
he is very tall
have you brought your cattle home?
I shall help you bring your cattle home
you preceded me in getting a job
my father forbids me to smoke
I will visit you when they close the office
khau rope is good for fettering animals
what village are you from?
the rain is falling, there is thunder and lightning
my son, do you hurt yourself?
have you rinsed the dishes ?
I am going to take a bath
today I am going to wash my car
we shall take bath
I hurt my foot on a stone
he thumped his feet on the ground as a challenge to me
he finished off two plates of rice
I got a three day leave of absence
they are digging a rat's hole
he must be a bad person (it has been thought so)
we eat food in the plate
your body is like a well built man
the one who winnows the chaff with a bamboo plate is my sister
the mother feeds her child by after she chewed the food
he stands with his arms akimbo (lit. he supports his hips)
he is totally blind ("his eyes dried up")
your cooked meat is so dry that it is hard ro chew
his voice is quite resounding
cancer disease is still very dangerous
may I please borrow your eraser to wipe out some letters
rats burrow their holes
today I am goint to spin the yarn too
my mother spins yarn on a spinning wheel
please do not disturb me while I am spinning the yarn
our seedlings are germinating now
when our chicks hatch I will give you some
you yourself have to accompany me
they inquired about me but they didn't find anything
he scratches his head
give me that cup
it will be good if you make the decision soon, whether or not you will be going
it will be good if you make decision soon
have you made the decision?
this guy is quite modest
she is a modest person
do not pretend to be modest beyond what you are
being frugal is good but if you are too close-fisted you will not be happy
it's windy that my lips chapped
they tie a cow with a rope
would you be able to tie the pig at its legs?
we eat food in bamboo basket plate
are you able to go?
he is a hardheaded person
which one of these will you take?
where are you going?/which place are you going?
come on, let me help you
he is a knocked knee person ("his knee is knocked")
since his knee is knocked he walked like a duck
it's difficult to gather firewood in the rainy season
we want to get together for worship
I am satisfied with food
almost all the Chins are Christian
I choked on your cigar's smoke
in your house is too much smoke
please try not to have your fire smoke too much
the weather in Hakha is sometimes cool and sometimes bad
day is breaking
the weather is cold
the weather is hot
the weather is warm
the weather is good (i.e. the weather is dry)
he is successful ("he pierced through the cosmos hole")
when the day breaks we will start our journey again
this year's winter is very cold
as for this year cold season it is so cold that we cannot go out hunting
do not be too loud over there
if you are too loud people will not like you
a cock crows
who was the last one who hold the feast of honoring the wife?
in former time the chief hold the feast of khuangcawi in order to honor their wife
the one who is breaking stones over there is my grandfather
I am inflicted with boil and it affect me so bad
the rope that is painted with yellow bee wax is hard to decay
bee wax is good for bird trap
there is drought for three months
he is a visitor (i.e. a stranger)
he is our guest
may the village guardian goddess look after you
we will go to the river to catch fish when winter comes
rain currents dug out the road
you need to be more thoughtful in regard to this matters
when it really thundered it is quite dangerous
we still miss Chin hills after we settled in foreign countries
because my wife returned to her father's house I have to cook for myself
if you return to your father's home again and again, you will get addicted to it
your goods are too expensive
his hair is thick (i.e. he has a thick hair)
the warps on your loom are too close together
he got a cold and he coughed
is asthma contagious?
you will have round worm if your drinking water is not clean
as for our goat since it knelt all the time it's knee get calloused
I don't know whether it is because his knee is knocked, he walked like a duck
all of you, either male or female must come
bow your heads please
if you don't bow in front of the bosses they could get angry
please put the cup upside down
if children have round worms they do not grow up very well
cow horn and mythun horn are not going to be equal
it's necessary to listen carefully the cutting edge of the words he speaks
before the fog vanished away we will not be able to see things clearly
the cows stayed overnight at the enclosure near the village
you always used too much oil when you fried curry
just the fat and the fat on the abdomen are not the same
only after the children cried and shrieked we also went out
this place has now become desolate
my feet are cold
when the road was too zigzag we all got dizzy
the one who looked after your things was no other but me
as soon as you are not satisfied you frowned
you must not leave your house by itself (i.e., without people living)
every one agrees
the day after tomorrow is my birthday
please measure your blanket by cubits
your bamboo trees are so high that they just bend down to the ground
I stumbled over a stone, fell down and had my elbow bruised
there are wrinkles in his face ("the skin of his face wrinkles")
your shirt is too wrinkled
old age cause his skin to wrinkle
he is tired and wants to sleep
the reason why he is so sleepy over there is because he is so tired
I want to have the cavity of my tooth patched
he has a bass voice ("his voice is deep and hollow")
after his teeth have too many holes it is hard for him to eat
he tried very hard pretending that he has a deep voice
send me a letter soon
my cup is broken
if you break all out eating plates all the time how would we survive
as for this branches I tried very hard to bend it down, but I was not able to do it
your smoking pipe is quite pretty
he is bandy-legged
they are herding the cattle in Laithingrawn
you took us to the river from the longer road
the bullets are made of lead
I am chewing beetlenut
the stem and head of the mushroom are of the same taste
he is so tall that he droops
my grandfather is quite old and that he is hunchbacked now
as for my grandfather he did not walk around much after he became hunchbacked
we are fencing our garden
our garden has no fence
if you have to go, you have to go (what else can be done!)
I am now thirty years old
he is living a long life ("his lifespan is very long")
she stoops and picks up her necklace
she is now ceremonially clean after her childbirth
his handiwork are pretty
is there anything that will make you lessen your power to do this thing
they shake their hands
since his back is hunched people usually take him as an old man
please visit us on your way of return
rain and sun made our lumber to concave
my mother dries cotton in the sun
they teased the cotton with a bamboo bow
I feels lonely today
are you going to accept the job?
Nothing's gonna change my for you
a rope bruises my hand
come before you go
he stands at the center of the floor
break the sugarcane in the middle
he stands in their midst
your house is quite central (i.e. is at the center of the village)
if the location of the church is not central it matters
their tune is so flat
when you sing if your voice is flat it is not pretty
I am going to go now
he committed a murder last year
as for the the sun, it does not know how to return
I like the way he pitches the tune
love him while he is still among you
who will come from among you
there seems to be a thief among us
I think that what I taught them is a waste
he has an illegimate child
in the past he used to lord over others
he was followed by his retinues
since he often danced on the main road he was thought of as crazy
did they hold a feast of dance for your grandfather
he is so fond of popularity that he tried to be very popular
although she is quite pretty she has freckles in her face
I was so alarmed that I jumped
I shall be appreciative if you come
the cup is empty
have you ever travelled by boat?
the sound of a fife comes from a mountain
I will call you after I got back home
when she returned to her husband her children were very happy
we cook sulphur beans
he celebrates his birthday
a snake crawls
he came while we were choosing seeds
he is one of the one who does not want to curry favor from others
he ran away
we are taking a walk
they are playing the leng seeds
he is sitting outside (the house)
we speak with our tongues
you may sit down on the ground
I don't want to live in this world without you
if he shakes his head it means that he is not satisfied
they made me pay fine although I was not wrong
I pour animal feed into the trough for the pigs
as for this year I will not be able to plough the field
we ploughed the field with water baffaloes
they communicate in Morse codes
your board is warping
he is a busy body (i.e. he plays alot)
if you play too much you will bother people
he does not know how to persuade people
drinking is quite addictive
he swallowed a fish bone and it stuck in his throat
if you don't like it that much then don't eat
our cart rolled over on the slope
please answer my letter soon!
he goes back and forth between Hakha and Thantlang
do you know how to swim?
water collects into a pool in our courtyard
I was so tired that I could'nt even lick a candy
a small deer disappeared from the mountain top
please be prepared before the river overflow!
my father died leaving us behind
he cannot pay back his debt since he wanted to borrow all the time
we shall go beyond the hill
a small stream also can overflow
as he became richer he also became cockier
I cannot swim
can you swim in the water?
I saw a snake while I was swimming
I happened to touch a ling tree and it made me itch
he died at the prime of his life
thou shalt not lie/speak a lie
people sometimes jeered at him because his lip curled up
is there ever any person who never speak lies?
it is hard to believe his words since he always speak lies
water covers all their fields
he is very energetic when he works
have you completed your task?
I have finished my work
the sun is hot
one should not go outside while the sun is too hot
his lip curls up
he fell and his knee got abraded
the Chin used to divine before they became Christians
have you finished clearing the jungle for your field?
today I am going to go to the field
since he is similar to his parents he is also handsome
the ants bit me while I was picking mangoes
I donot like it
it is possible to live without house
it pecks at his throat
he has goiter
since their small dog is so cute (young and plump) so many people compete to get it
Pa Ling superceded Pa Sai in running
since he is so free and spoiled no one likes him
he earns one hundred dollar a day
how much is your wage per day?
work hard if you want to be successful
please try out my hat!
let me try your coat
a midwife delivers a baby
she has plenty of ornaments
we run out of songs while we were still very enthusiastic in our singing
a good friend should not forsake his friend
you should not deceive any body
this kind of person cannot trick me
if you used your money frugally, there will be some extra money (i.e. be superflous)
he is intelligent in addition to being hardworking
he still does not regret after they beat him up
he is very good at dodging in soccer
have you reaped the paddy yet?
he tosses up coins in the air
a rat escapes from its escape hole
he is not clear if he is going or not (i.e., it is not clear if he is going or not)
he injures his hand
they met an accident on the way
he asked me to chase the bear that he wounded but I dared not
be dilegent when you follow the wounded animal
here are many thorns in the jungle
have you ever rolled up a lady skirt?
please put the wood in the fire
she tried to get a firewood while the fire was inflaming, and it burnt her hand
he spent all his money in no time
he lost his life for the love of his country
you defeat me totally !
I jumped and jumped yet I could not reach it
I use bamboo as the handle for my sword
if anyone can contribute one chicken we shall be grateful
your pitsaw is too dull now
do you know anybody who transfer money?
I authlorize him to draw money from the bank
he handed over the book to me
he puts his finger in the hole of the wall
he is quite successful in his education
Jesus took one round piece of bread and broke it into pieces 
today I am going make catapult pellets
he makes catapult pellets (balls) with mud
have you been staying at home these days?
if you don't love your country, who will?
he knows a lot of ancient stories
I saw an antique shop
it is said, wine gets sweeter the older it gets
the rat comes out of its hole because we blow smoke in the hole
there is an abra sion in my hand
there is a scar in his hand
I completed the task I set for myself in weeding his field
I trust him because he speaks truthfully
what you said was true
in writing, accuracy is more important than speed
if your thinking is not right, what you do also will not be right
we donot use knife for writing
having to smoke as a habits is not good
go ahead in front of us
there is no place where man or bed bug cannot squeeze in
you should respect the old
you should give respect to other religions as well
we use cars for travelling
because he lies (i.e. be in the habit of lying), no one believe him anymore
even foxes and birds have nests and lairs but you do not even have a lover
you did not even tell us that you travelled
even if he does not like to go to school you should let him get education 
even if he died he would live again
please look at this side for a minute
I will travel to Indiana tomorrow
will you have time to take pciture with us ?
of the two horses the latter is stronger
I don't want to be the last
you were the ones who were here first
if you don't have suffering first, you cannot succeed
one should not talk too much in terms of first comer vs. latter comer
he is first in every thing
firstly I want to say this
he was talking nonesense in sleep
in shifting cultivation, the forest cannot be lush, neither the soil be rich
among the ones who cleared that forest, my grandfather was one of them
to clear the virgin forest for the first time will be very difficult
if you want to break bread into pieces, you may do so
donot put the pebbles in your mouth
your field hut is pretty small, hah!
she is a small child
he keeps a very small rabbit
if you squeeze the egg it will break
please massage my back
when I was small, I was afraid of ghost
when I was small I could not carry heavy load
his wife died and he is now living alone
malaria seems to get hold of me
there is an identification mark on his neck
what sign will you give us that we may be able to find your house?
is there anything on your body for identifying you or for your identification?
do you want to go? of course
that couple's sizes are inproportionate (i.e. one is too big and another is too small)
we do not know your size
rice is now well cooked
fruits taste bitter before they got ripe
after the rice is well cooked we will eat
I cannot have the chicken meat well-cooked yet
please extinguish the fire
our enemies wanted to exterminte our race
everyone knows a blind person cannot see
have you seen your earning yet?
I have not yet received the money you sent
he shot a barking deer at point blank range but missed it
his word has power
that man exploits people, be careful!
you the rich, should not exploit the poor
because you cannot see in the dark you should use torch light
you should reply me as soon as you receive my letter
I earn ten dollar a day
let those who have seeing eyes see
please send me the receipt for the money
please show me the way
please demonstrate to us your skill
if you teach us with demonstration, we will understand more clearly
your cooking smells good
perfume is called perfume because it is fragrant
some Chin youngsters have hair in their chest
if you remain stable you will live
they go together
a new broom sweeps cleaner
he is a sweeper
your lips are so pretty
all the birds have beak
she is a pleasant person of good conversation
he/she is a nice person to talk with
don't you be nosy
no one will like you if you are too talkative
hat lady, since she is too talkative she stumbles a lot
we hear with our ears
there is plenty of water at the source
students are attending school
I am hopeless in my job
you become hopeless too ea sily
I am hopeful that I shall pass the exam
when we are too optimistic and hopeful it can also bring about disappointment
we have a great hope that you will come back
if you want to make noise, you should go outside
when my grand father began to be deaf he was seventy years old
how long has it been your deafness?
he is deaf in one ear
do not make noise ("don't be noisy")
the place where they have festivals is very noisy
after my grandfather became hard of hearing, it was quite difficult to talk to him
I feel secure in my job
KawiCeu is an easy-going man
have peace of mind, do not be anxious/worrying
your words comfort me
the comforter has come
words alone cannot console us; words alone cannot give us comfort
trees have many leaves in rainy season
wild banana leaves are good for packing lunch
do not be jealous of others
aren't you jealous of my good looking and my high education?
do not disturb me
do not give me a disturbance
I am disturbed and so please come visit with me
he is a troublesome person
there is pus in his wound
he has a soft corner for me in his heart ("he keeps me between his ribs")
your ears are quite big
because he is hard of hearing it is very difficult to talk to him
I do not feel like eating ("my mouth is dull") 
your coffe makes my tongue dull (i.e. blunt in perception of taste)
the Chin used to believe in the art of witches
a young woman and a young man are kissing one another
a mother kisses her child
kissing reveals loving kindness
you shall not stick your snot to others
he is very immature ("he does not even know how to blow his nose")
the Chins are mostly of flat nose
as for the horses, those with wider nostrils are said to be stronger
he snores at nigh
since he snores at night it is quite difficult to sleep near him
half of the students passed their exams
I will slice you the solid fat if I killed a pig
since I finished my job I am free from hustle
I want to be in quietness
I agree to what you said
we do not agree with you regarding what you did
they made an agreement
you should wipe your nose
foot wiping staff is usually placed at the entrance of the living room
since my knife is so dull, it cannot cut the wood properly
he returns my meat, i.e. he refused to accept my gesture of reconciliation
a dirt gets into my eye
my shirt is dirty
if you go on a slippery road donot be in a hurry
the person who is scrubbing the flloor over there is my elder sister
children, look how dirty you make our home!
after you dip your garments in soap wash them by pounding
we have been pressured to work on the motor road construction but they cannot pressure us
he works hard
they pressured her to get married but they couldnt do it
I am going to test you whether or not you are skilful
victory over temptation will give you power
he is miserly
he is so stingy that he might not want to give even his feces
the more stingier you are the unhappier you will become
I tried to comfort him but it was of no use
God's word alone can console us
In Myanmar both women and men wear skirts
she is the youngest of us
let's have a picnic near a river
please go buy two eggs
try this pair of pants
fire is about to burn
do you know the one who dip my blanket into water?
he dipped his garment in the water
a dog sniffs at the road
green wood (wood which is not dry) cannot burn ea sily
it is very important that our environments are green
in order for trees and plants to be green they need to be well taken care of
shake the branch of the tree
the wind shakes our house
his position is not stable, but shaky
monkeys shake the branches
there are people who are said to have soften bones
your mustard greens are so luxuriant
he makes me lie down in green pasture
if you do not make your environments luxuriantly green, who will
when she was about to depart from her mother her heart became tender and she wept
it is very easy to cry when we are emotional
she is the youngest child and she always try to get attention from the parents
you will be late for school
I was the last to go out
you are going to make me late for school !
stand behind me
since I left our village I have not heard from them at all
I came after he left
if you continues to rub you eyes it will become all red
I shall follow you from behind (i.e. I shall follow you; I shall come after you)
do not turn your back on us
once you left donot come back at all
she has reached the age of puberty
I saw a deer where we beat out animals
your food is rich and delicious
your food was so delicious that we did not know how we ate
if you would like to iron clothes you need to buy an iron
ivory is very expensive
snakes have fang
you come again
he is going to brag again over there !
turn towards me
if you can answer me vocally please do so
look at me ("turn towards me"
since he stammers it is necessary to listien to him patiently
if you don't answer me vocally in the dark I do not know that your are near me
he can speak in Japanese/he can speak Japanese
don't speak of it too much, you might bring bad luck on me
please come! let's get together nearby the open fire
don't bask in the sun that is too hot !
even if I walk through a deep valley, I will not be fearful
the rapid of this river is very swift
he is so insistant in getting things for himself that it's a shame
is the foundation of your house strong?
the beginning of my desire to have education is from my childhood
I am sorry that we could not condole with him when his mother died
he groans in pain
we heard a wild animal groaning
we should care the sick
his mother died and we condoled with him
he took my book by force
 God began to create the heaven and earth
your voice, isn't it a little harsh, my friend!
do not speak wild and harsh words
it's cold because wind is blowing
a tiger invaded our village killing many of our domestic animals
if your words are harsh people will get angry
he took away my things violently
the ones who helped me when I was in prison were my true friends
now it will be about ten oclock in the evening in their country
I had been around Hakha and quite familiar with it
I had been around Tlangkhua village and quite familiar with it
we are going to have dinner with them
when you go for dinners in other people house you should behave nicely
we are following the course of the river
when you followed the river to catch the fish, I really wanted to come along
if you destroy your book you will have no book
it is quite easy to do destruction
the boom of his gun echoes through the hills
Judas is a dishonest person
the words that dishonest person tell is a connected speech of lies
put the books on the shelf
I put on trousers
why do you wear your ring on your lefthand finger?
we shall have meal together ("we shall share our meals")
coughing can be passed on by means of sharing things together
it is possible to cook the Chinhill's cactus as soup?
they could not corner the porcupine in its hole("they could not fetter the porcupine in its hole")
did you tie your cow (and put it in the shed)?
we use ax for cutting trees
they missed calling my name
try not to miss even one word
when you encounter bypassing, you should try to understand
those who persecute others are bad people
Khar Mang is the one who tamed our horse
donot inflict yourself with too much work
bad kings persecute their people
they torture the prisoners
we have tamed our stalion
just like they inflict (pain) on others, they will also get inflicted
the enemies wanted to besiege the town but they could not do it
was the cord that they fettered you with an iron cord?
rope is best for tethering cows
lock up the door
in former days the Chins used sticks for locking up their homes
your daughter is quite thin and lean
he is a slender person
many white women would like to be really really slender
it is better not to speak scathing words
iron cord is sturdier than cotton cord
because our soil at the farm is so thin our sprouts are not good
birch wood is not that good for firewoo
our house is on the outskirt of the village
Our house is an outlying house
I comb my hair with a comb
we comb the thread of the yarn
thorns scratch his leg
we use combs to comb our hair
the one who is combing her hair overthere is my sister
there are many people left who knows how to comb the thread of yarn
the thorn that scratched me was wild apple's thorn
We should try to avoid eating fat
those who avoid quarrels are wise persons
there is no way of avoidance
he tries to evade me
I tried to avoid him many times and when I cannot avoid it then we quarrelled
your knife is very sharp
gun is military weapon
he has a wound
airplane is one of the best weapons
last ngiht, I had only light sleeping the whole night
he is a light sleeper
if you often have light sleeping at night you will not be able to work during daytime
the leaves are green
because their land is green there are plenty of animals
it is dangerous to eat meat while it is raw
our sow has given birth to many piglets
any kind of people have their own ancestor
for God so loved the world he gave his son
what you did is so good
the color of her skirt is deep green
they plan a fishing expedition for tomorrow
do you have any planning to do tthis thing ?
as human beings we all have relatives to a certain extent
it is very precious for a Chin girl to own strings of small brass rings
those who live dirty hygenetically usually have head lice
there are two kinds of nits: one addled and one alive
choose what you like among the oranges
they live very close to our house
the person who was said to roll down a stone was Kam Lo
they roll the rock down
he was felled down with one shot
youngmen Kamlothang and Penghlei Thang wrestled and Penghlei Thang defeated Kamlothang
explain what you said
I myself will go surely
I absolutely like it
we shall take rest for one hour and get refreshed
I am reading a book for getting refreshed
even if others cannot make it, your yourself must come, please !
I absolutely believe him
our bith gave birth to six pups
we ought to chastise the children when they are naughty
our offsprings are the one whom we should take good care of
if anyone is not born again he will not be able to see the kingdom of God
he is always alert
he is quite alert
he is a light sleeper
since he is a light sleeper he can be awaken very ea sily
there is plenty of sicness these days
he just wants to intimidate people (he dares not do anything else)
Penghlei is quite skillful to make a threat
he threatened his co-workers that he would beat them up
he threatened his fellow workers that he would put them in jail
he is a dishonest person
since he was too deceitful no one believe his words anymore
could you share me your food with Pu Lian?
this coming week we will pound the acacia bark in the river (to make the fish dizzy)
I am putting a fence around our garden
he will guide you
lead us the way
a father leads his child by its hand
the one who is twisting strands of fibres to form a rope is my grandfather
they made fifty round pellets of catapult
they were twisting three strands of threads into a rope
I want to have a cord of rope
we are going to put up stakes for our beans
because he was foolish, he spoke what he should not have spoken
foolishness sometimes bring along bad thing
let him guide us
if the one who always guide others lead us, our path will be smoother
it's impossible to plug a square hole with a round peg
I shall put on trousers
it's a long time since I have been putting on this shirt
when they celebrated the killing of tiger they poke it's eyes with woman's hair ornament
he is groaning in pain
donot go near to a tiger while is is roaring
don't be foolish
a fool never says that he is crazy
don't stand in the heat of the sun lest you faint
my grandfather was very courageous, they said
he is a man who has manner
courageous people are as as useful as they are courageous
your child is very ill-tempered
since my child is so ill-tempered I dare not go out among people that much
ences can also be used to surround the house
this girl is whom I have selected for engagement ("I surrounded this girl for myself")
we surround two barking deers in the area (for games)
I am not willing to work anymore that much
if you are not willing to work you should also be not willing to eat
a fat man eat food with pleasure over there
donot go and hate people without any reason!
as people there will be people who hate us as well as who love us
I hate him
I hate laziness
looking with hate and looking with love is similar, they said
I have no hatred against him
since he scratched his head too much he lost his hair along the way
has the water come out from the well that you dug up?
she scratches her head
he suffers death
if you don't behave well you will be inflicted with scold
come up here
go up there
he went up to the mountain
please open the lid of your pot
since he opens the door the air comes in
if you cover up your eyes you will not be able to see
please tell me when my rice is well steamed (well cooked)
his power is great
he covers up her wrong doing
have you ever seen a gibbon hanging from a tree?
he gets the lion's share of the profits ("he scoops all the profits")
are you going again?
the smoke of your cigarette blows against me
is your shirt dry?
if the trouser you dry outside is dry go and bring it in
he holds coins in his hand
we shall attend his funeral
he holds on to his little money without spending it
we met at (while attending) a funeral
you rice has so many unhusked grain
we shall keep the children in safety
we should preserve our forests and environments
when you go up to school please drop by at our house
when you come up to our house bring some mustard leaves for us
we have set the table (we have set the meal for you), please come and eat in circle together
shall we set the table (meal) for you now?
he set liquors before him over there!
it is dangerous for girls to be around male who are so horny
have you steamed your rice?
male goats are so horny that they can be known by their voice
the choir that they sang is very good to listen
because of your words he is unhappy
if I made you unhappy, please forgive me
he is a shy person ("he does not look into others face")
if you are too shy you will not get a chance to dig in the curry
you are very useful to me
since he is too stubborn, he no longer even knows how to cry
because they were so thirsty they fell some banana trees and suck from the stalk
because my work is too hard I am quite tired
I really crave for meat these days
even if you are not useful to others please do not be the one who destroy things!
the way you take your teps are too slow
he always let himself unneeded and he became unneeded
are you willing to go to downtown?
we are not willing to ask you for what you are not willing to speak
wipe your tears
let us help one another
that book is mine, and this book is yours
she gets up and goes
Are you coming?
Dawtku is charming
I like your food quite a lot
the one I love is she whom others cannot compete (in her charm)
I cannot tolerate his words
have you been baptised?
he has bad temper
this small lady is ill-tempered
pray always before you sleep (i.e. before you go to bed)
I am sleepy; I am tired and I want to sleep
I have no place to sleep
I have no bed for sleeping
when it rains continously for about a week, it becomes really wet
your mattress is big
if you pour water on a child it will sob
they came to understand only after they suffered many hardships
to endure hardship is very difficult for the sufferer
we have been suffering too long
na kal in kan kal ve
we come from Hakha by foot
we write with a pen
the box is made of wood
we shall help you
we hang our guitars on the branches of the willows
we wanted to go home very very much
our house is a wooden house
they decorated nicely the interior/inside of their house
those who live in the outskirt of the village are usually poor people
we use galvanized roofing tins for the roof
their house is on the left side of our house
are you going to bed now?
it rains continuously for three days
my goodness, I am chosen to do the job
he meddled with my guitar and destroyed it
I am going to the church
I am happy if you love me
let not bad words come out of your mouth
he was gagged almost to death
give me food just two mouthfuls
donot shut the door way
my appetite is good
my appetite is not good
I got up from bed just now
please speak to us two or three words, meaning very briefly
he speaks sweet words
he speaks harsh words
you cannot be at two places at one time
I accidentally hit myself with a knife
I have been asleep
the whole village of theirs burned up
he shot a deer with a gun
the rock cracked and therefore parted
the wind blows and my lips crack therefore blood comes out of the crack
he is an Anglo Chin
a falcon picked up our chick
I am busy and so I cannot come
we climb the hill
prices are going up
why didn't you come along when we went up the mountain?
it will be harder to live if the prices are going up so much
lots of fishes are gathered at the rapids in the rivers
donot raise the prices of things too much
your male cow mated our female cow
the rock cracks
since his kidneys are not too good they ask him to drink lots of water
have you ever gone to Hakha before?
may God lead you in your way ("may God lead you where you go")
Suiku is accompanied by her mother to school (i.e. Suiku's mother goes with Martha to school)
I shall take your books with me
we will leave you behind if you takes too long ("go leaving you behind")
donot leave me behind
he contradicts whatever I say
he entangled my leg
do you promise that you will really do it ?
when they swear it is not taken lightly
he never change his position
when he does not change his position, people come to depend on him again
you should rinse your mouth with salt and water
what do you guys use for rinsing your mouth?
have you rinsed your mouth?
we are unable to make him talk
we find it very difficult to let him talk
he remains silent ("he remains with his mouth shut")
we bring you a chicken for opening our talk with you
I promised you one hundred dollar
he stood by me in time of trouble
we shall eat food
we did not understand what you told us
do you want to drive home the cattle now?
he went to the river ahead of me
he never gives us a chance to speak (i.e. he speaks all the words before we do)
it would be the case the the quicker will out-finish the slower ones
just between ourselves...
can you shoot that bird?
go one step forward
she was so tired that she cannot even move her leg for one step
open your thighs
he steps forward one step
there is one road between the houses
two multiply by two is four
have they increased your salary?
such person who can straddle the road would be huge !
let there be reconciliation between you
how much increment did they give you for your salary?
his friend arrived just after he left
I arrived just now
if your appetite is good that means you are healthy
all the small streams dried up because of the drought
because there is no rain many of the streams are drying up
when rivers dried up fish also died along with it
please open the book
I am going to kindle a fire
don't forget to read it when you open your book
we kindle fire with a match
the sea is very wide
the football field is six hundred feet broad
your room is very large
heir country is a vast one
as their country get bigger, they also become richer
they broaden their sleeping room
they widen the road
they collect money for widening the road
he bites off his friend's ear
there still is a bitemark (scar) that he bit
they like to dig the holes of the rat
his head is bald
our mountains are becoming bare as trees are cut without discrimination
we will beat the pods off the stems of beans
he starting wearing a hat since he became bald
your friend invites you to meal
the police summon him
he did not get the summoning letter (the subpoena)
your yam is very sweet (and tasty)
my best friend becomes my enemy
it's now two years since he and I have become friends
you and I will take one another as friends
the handle of your adze is crooked
the roads in the Chin Hills are very curvy
since the handle of your axe is crooked be careful
he construes what I said as good
yesterday, I was looking for my cows all day
I have been looking for my cow but did not fint it
there are plently of fruits in Burma
he is an intelligent man and he can go to the ends of the earth
my friend cut his head bald
the top of the hill is barren that nothing can be grown on it
please put in the horse in its shelter
we also can grow maize in Chin hills
I shall hemstitch my blanket
they plan to put together their son and daughter but they did not succeed
they bind their knowledge together and accomplish good things
they twine two strings of wire
he is a good man and it's nice to befriend with him
when we beat the pods off the stems we shall give you as a gift about two pounds
look! two pigs gore one another over there
when two pigs gore one another they trampled all the young plants
I saw a big stag standing at the depression of the hill
it's a pleasure to associate with him
please buy three heads of cabbage
I shall copy what you wrote
the car is bumpy because of the holes in the road
the gates are usually closed at night
are the cracks on your soles painful?
we were late because the road was too winding
he lives only by the words of his wife since he is not very manly
my father is a school teacher
our step father is good on us
my abdomen hurt
Lai males are mostly manly persons
this year our harvest is poor
this year our havest is not very good since our cultivation is rather poor
we plant apple trees on the sides of the hill
since our figs bear bad fruits we cannot eat them
we plant flowers near our house
they placed wreaths on the grave
we put a garland on the neck of our missionary
our bananas are good (fruits) this year
the reason why our bananas are good this year is because there are plenty of rain
rain fall pushed through our fences (and knocked them down)
he stumbled over a stone and fell on the ground
there are so many people at the market that they bump into one another
he sings while walking
I like the figs somewhat
your wife is quite beautiful
can we call those males who live alone as widower ?
some students have come
soccer playing is his talent
he is drunk and goes staggering
as he was drunk and staggered, we supported to walk
he has a foreign accent in speaking Lai
when he has foreign accent in his Lai, we know that he is not a Lai
the one who is carrying rice with a bag is my elder brother
I carried my books with a bag
the rules on your paper are not straight
since your lines are crooked, you will need to correct them
there will be a wrestling match in the village and people will wrestle
it is a pleasure to see Runglianceu and Kaptawng wrestle
they said that there will be a wrestling match at old town
you put too much salt into the soup
he throws himself into the fire
we use a lot of plastic pipes to draw water
your cane basket is pretty stout
he brought us a (cane) basket full of figs
he has plenty of money
odd numbers are one, three, five, seven, and nine
you're the odd man out today!
it's none of your business that I'm the odd man out today!
donot puff out the smoke of your cigarette
if you puff it too much you will cough
they go one by one
we eat meal in the plate
we keep water in the ba sin
we keep salt on the table in a saucer
he got first in running race
drinking is useless
all my love to you has no worth for you
our efforts are all in vain
everything is vanity, says the Preacher
women also smoke with male smoking pipe
most Burmans usually pray at the pagoda
you do not want to pass by (and visit with us)
on our way to Yangon we shall have a passing visit with you
a deer stepped on our trap and it was caught
we pass through Bangkok on the way to America
when we go to Yangon, we pass through Mandalay
if you happen to step on the trap it will catch you
if they don't want to visit us, what can we do
we have three delegates to the association
every Lai person is an ambassador to all the Lai people
bats usually live in cave
I mistook him completely (i.e. I did not recognise him at all)
I made a mistake in my math
to err is human but to forgive divine
please forgive me of my mistake/wrong doing
it is nows three years since we have been having famine
this year we are lacking food grains
we shall be in famine this year because the rains is not good
your food is used wantonly
you are wasteful on food too much
if you are wasteful you will be poor
he was drowned ("he died at water")
it is quite a long time since he died in the war
they did not find his body because he was drowned
famine will visit us this year because the rains is not good
it is bad to curse others
it is simply no good to use vulgar words against parents
we completely failed in our canal digging
we cannot start other things sicne we completely failed in our canal digging
paper is very thin
as for this lady, her body is pretty because her stomach is slim
we approached him for advice
he has a bright and cheerful face this morning
he has a long face this morning
you can eat any food
every one of you can go
anyone who wants to come can come
whosoever may come
whatever may befall you, trust in God
they surprised him before he got up from bed
next week we will look for mushroom
although they work together, they do not respect one another
in working together we should respect each other
he stands on the peak of a hill
a bird perches on the top of a tree
how many angels can dance on the tip of a needle?
he sits on its very top
monkey can climb up to the very top of a tree
your flowers are blosoming now
when flowers blosom in rainy season, they make the admosphere more beautiful
please slice the bread into slices
I will come after I finished slicing the cake
have you killed an animal using a Chin flint lock gun ?
a cat was overrun by a car and it was smashed into pieces
the buds of the flower have opened up
we built a hut on stilts in the field
every male of them in their family went to the field
my sister does not yet have a husband
Lalluai was a real courageous man
fungi sprouted on the dry branch of a banyan tree
are you going to go the feast for Hrang Kap's killing a beast ?
he killed a pig in celebration of the game he killed
when my grandfather celebrate for his killing, I will invite you as well
she is manly
respect the old men!
most of the Lai people are now worshippers of God (i.e., Christians)
worshippers of God go to church on Sunday
although he is twenty years old, he has not yet matured
they can be mature men at eighteen years of age
can you pinpoint the fact that he has not matured yet ?
he is a married man
your husband tried to appear very manly
winter season is now about breaking in
I will come and visit you when the winter season arrives
a wildcat ate our chicken
how many people came?
your belly is quite fat
there is a baby in her womb
I have a stomach upset
please bring me three ears of corn
a cow moos
it is difficult to earn a living these days
we have to struggle hard for our living/livelihood
donot stand near the door
one Sterling pound is usually equal to one US dollar
two pounds and one fifth pound make one kilogram
there are many flowers in the environment of your house/near your house
we need to set out on our journey tomorrow
it is three days since we set out on our journey
it is very painful where my nail turned up loose
she is pregnant
when women are pregnant they throw up in the beginning part
a young woman was impregnated by a young man
our friends have set out on their journey
a tree fell on him and his shin bone broke
Thawngthawng is gluttonous
if you are gluttonus you will get fat
he jumped down from an escape door
our group has arrived
My love for her is getting deeper and deeper eveyday
the kind of them would not match you yet
this computer is a good type
this fish is of a good kind (eating)
the students go to school
my horse is gray
your horse is pretty because it is grey
this guy does not want to have fellowship with others
we had fellowship with our friends last night and we had a good time
since he cannot fellowship with others, he lives by himself
a leopard catches a pig
it is no good to mix food with sand
a mother cannot embrace her baby yet
the one who carry a child (on her lap) is my sister
he embraces the baby in his breast
I cannot accept your idea
I accepted your gift with thanks
a mother embraces her child (on her lap)
a youngman caressed a young girl (on his lap)
he/she pawns his/her house pay his debt
tiger is awsome
she was born posthumously
his younger brother was a posthumous child
I have gas in my stomach
to blow one's own horn is disgusting to others
his own boasting brings him down
their flattery makes him boastful
donot be boastful
he is proud of his new watch
you should not be arrogant
arrogance causes dissension
pride is not helpful
the noise of our cow mowing make me alarmed
we usually grow tomatoes in rainy season
his eyes are bulging
she is very pretty except her eyes are abit bulging
they conscripted them into porters
yesterday, a wild cat caught our chicken
she wiped her tears with a handkerchief
dhal is good food
twelve inches make one foot
please give me your pen
our land is getting less and less productive
The Burmans never ruled the Chins before the British rule
the Burmans do not want to govern them
are you still smoking?
there are 42 villages in Hakha subdivision
Chins make syphon with bambo tubes and beewax
if you can jump over the fence you would be able to escape
I saw a rabbit sprint
please join the cords in a loop
would you be able to continue your schooling?
the head and tail of what you said donot synchronize
it is needed to study without a break
it is possible to have correspondence by letters
we should have corresponedence with one another
give him a handful of rice
potters cook food with potsherds
she gives me a cup of cold water
our church is quite strong in giving
there are plenty of wood chips near our house
pleased give me a very little bit of your meat
I have only a little money
you don't go out hunting birds today, Uh!
a hunter stalks a deer
he chipped wood
you should not miss your classes
his elbow is dislocated
you must come without fail
dogs eat the crumbs of bread
I have only little money/a small amount of money
I have only very little money
I shall drink just a little bit of the milk
there is a hole in my shirt
the hole in our wall is quite wide/big
my pot is leaking because it has a hole
many want to immigrate to the USA
are you happier because you immigrated to the US ?
it has been quite long since they migrated to Myanmar
I told him about his father and he came to remember some things of his father
when he cannot understand, I no longer teach him
he punched a hole in the paper with a puncher
they used machines for tunneling the hill
you make me understand
if they rule the country with righteousness people are happy
when righteous people govern the country people are happy
we sucked the Chin beer with a bamboo tube
your house post is slanted
if you house post is slanted it will not be very strong
because he did not know how to give way to cars he was crashed by a car
he was given pension last year
we need to read more literature
Leaders must read many books
she is quite an independent person
that little child is quite independent
when she was more independent she became more annoying
we use papers to write
they crashed the bamboo and it became all flat
in former days people thought the world was flat
we crashed bamboo and made it flat in order to use it as a house wall
this fence is so high that I cannot jump it over
he is quite strong in high jump
he exeggerated what he heard
a horse lashed him with its hind legs
he is good at acrobatics
can you jump over this fence?
you cannot sprint beyond Hakha (i.e. you cannot live anywhere else other than Hakha)
we have plenty of beans in our garden
my gramdmother is eighty years old
my mother in law and father in law really loved me
a bag of rice costs two hundred
America is a great country
Yangon is the capital city of Myanmar
we sympathize with him
I shall take him along with me
my sister cooked a meal for me
they took all our food away
I shall write for you
my father has rested in the paradise
my nose clogs up
our water pipe is blocked
they sit close together
he goes the wrong way
I entered the wrong house accidentally
he is a dull boy
since he is abit dull it takes more time for him to learn
I cannot breathe well since I nose is so clogged up
the rattle snake bit him and he died
my nose is clogged that it is hard to breathe
they came in small number, one at a time
he sinks in the water
while you were sinking in the water, what do you think about?
can you dive to the bottom of the river for that fish down there?
my toe gets blistered
throw away the outer skins of the sugarcanes
she stands with her face bright and shiny
their village is beyond that hill
you should plant the rice closely
there is a swing near our house
if you want to swing in the swing you may have to come early
children are having a swing in the swing
your rafter is raised on one end (higher than the other end)
your house might leak since your rafter is raised at one end
whose chicken was the chicken that peck corn?
a chicken pecks corn ("pick up with its beak")
our water pipe is all clogged up
the road is at a dead end
Piter is a disciple of Lord Jesus
a sparrow pecks unhusked rice
the bow of the trap has become weak
her teeth protrudes
it's too bad you are sick
it does not matter if you don't feel like going
it matters that you are not serious about anything
the rope with which the cow was tethered came loose and the cow ran away
let us go home now if you no longer have any serious business
my little toe is in pain
I got pain on my hand from cutting grass
he had pain on his hand for boring wood
I cannot work well since my hand blistered
do you know who piled up (heap of) garbage nearby our house?
you should heap/dump the garbage at the garbage heap
we greatly need a garbage truck
my wound gets infected
it is very dangerous to let your wound to be infected
he/she exaggerates what he heard
I have a stomach upset
he is boastful about his good command of Burmese language
it is no good to blow one's own horn
pride is the root of sins
they said that my grandfather was a good hunter
my father in law and mother in law loved me
the Chin called the father of their wife and the brother of their wife with the same word
would you be able to carry this book?
please bring the chair
be careful when you carry the mirror! you might accidentally drop it!
you shall not bring knife to the school
she carries a baby on her back
deers appear in the field in the evening
his theft got revealed
he was very embarassed because his theft got revealed
he was piqued
please donot talk to him while he is so piqued
you annoyed me so much
he fires a gun
they exploded bombs at the river
they popped corn
he went to Mandalay at the time of water festival
he is tired because the child he carries is big
at the hunting festival of Sangmang, ten barking deers were shot down
your pig is now big
I will buy your pig when it gets bigger
he is a proud man
silk blanket is expensive
the cloth you bought for trousers is too small
tie of the mantle across the chest by its four ends so as not to impede the legs
children donot yet know how to put on blankets
we wear red silk blanket during the festival
we are going to buy long cloth for your coat
last night my grandmother visited with us
we were so happy last night because my grandmother visited with us
the earth did not have form
their domestic animals have increased
they are quite rich now since their cattles increased
they allege him of stealing
children kiss each other
in 1918 there was an influenze epidemic in the Chin Hills
chickes die in great number of disease
because our chickens died in great number we no longer have chickens
we cross the river in a raft
draw a circle on your paper
you must appear in court in person
we shall gather together
we shall worship together in the church
cam you assemble your friends?
the shot us while we were worshipping
the world is round, not flat
I also knew that the earth is round
Penghlei and CeuLul also are beads
we have famine and we went ot the Burman area to buy grains
we met while we were buying food in other village during the famine
the world you left behind
can we reach the village in the evening?
if we cannot reach the village we shall make a stop on the way
is it possible to reach your village in one day?
shall we be able to reach the village today?
we shall be able to reach the village in the evening
I am afraid I might catch cold
I am careful about taking shower since I am afraid that I might catch cold
they popped firecrackers
she spreads out a blanket on the floor
to spread the leaves before killing sacrificial animal, meaning, talking without making preparation (do not spread the leaves before killing the animal)
we spread leaves in the temporary tent
there are plenty of reeds on the banks of the river
our village is quite low in elevation
the reason why your village is quite warm is because it is in the low lying land
she likes too much gossiping
I longed for the time when we talk about love
your bucket is dented
you were quite drunk that you didn't even know that your liquor cup is not full
he canceled his trip because his friends discouraged him
they frightened him many times but he was not afraid
he unfortunately believed their discouragement
malaria is rampant in low lying areas
I have money to buy books
there are plenty of cherries in the Chin Hills
we have a farm in flatland
green guava is astringent in taste
we do not eat young fruits since they are astringent
her skirt's width is two cubits (thirty six inches)
we shall come rejoicing bringing in the sheaves
we could not possibly extinguish the burning house
could you extinguish the fire?
they paid me ten kyats a day
have you arrive home yet?
they write with chalk on the blackboard
she can eat a lot of food
she gets fatter since she is very gluttonous
what song have you been composing?
we cannot believe him anymore ever since he created too much lies
do not go out without slippers!
what have you reached in your writing?
how long has it been since you arrived?
their income is small and they find it hard to make ends meet
he shot him with a sound of pho!
he presented me one hundred kyats
my hand has rash from nettle sting
I did not know that he had rash on his body
it is possible to build a house with bamboo
spread out the map on the table
grounds of peanuts is very good for animal feed
he cannot swing his foot forward because there is a wound in it
he had a hard time swinging his leg forward
have you opened the milk tin?
they used shields in fighting
although they are in want of money they are still happy since they love one another
divide four by two
they distribute meat among themselves
we cross the river Chindwin in a barge
the small baby can raise its head now
they pried a rock with a lever
a levery is very good for prying a rock
they made me very angry
he was very angry because they opposed him all the time
no one can infuriated him because he has a very good heart
the one who pluck chicken feathers is my brother
I don't know the name of the one who extracted my tooth
the one who pulled off her hair was her husband
my grandfather and my father rooted out the weeds
he pulled out a lot of her hair
a doctor extracted my tooth
a cook pluck the feathers of a chicken
they rooted out the weeds
please unleash the dog
please unpack the parcel
please unlock (the lock)
I shall pluck off rice seedlings to give them to you
the grove of reeds along the river is very thick
if you take a shortcut road it will be nearer
distribution of labor is very essential
they fought with one another while they were allocating meats
calculator is necessary for distribution of money
it is no good to play cards but it is fun
he is a cunning person
since he is so cunning it is hard to believe his words
this shield that protect us from the wind is very helpful
they shot him with arrows, but he could shield himself
we need to cut down the trees that obstruct the view of our house
the wind break can give a good protection to our house
he could not defend himself properly
he made more mistakes as he defended himself
Peter denied once his being a disciple of Jesus
we can deny in our action just as in our words
he chops off a banana tree with a sword
sword is very good for chopping the banana trees
a car splashed mud on me
my trousers get dirty from being splashed with mud
can you chop off this wood with one stroke?
there is a tattoo on his thigh
the road is level for two miles
we get tired more ea sily when the road is not level
he sits lazily
the hamstring of the cow was cut off that it could not go
they invited us to the marriage
have you ever gambled?
donot participate in the gambling
you may unspring your trap
he pulled the trigger of his gun
they broke their engagement
they have disposed of their bullock cart
because they are rich peopel even what they disposed of are still pretty good
the wind break cannot protect our house
the trees obstruct the view of the school
the wind break protects our house properly
the tree under which we took shelter/protection fell down
we take shelter in the leeward side of the rock
he keeps his friends at arm's length
we should not discriminate one another
by excluding one another we donot profit anything
we spread mat on the floor and slept there
we dry meat above the fire
they threw a spear at him but he dodged it
you should not shy away from taking responsibility of what you should do
when we reach the saddle of the hill we shall stop for rest
he is a man who evades responsibility
you should not evade duties in your work
you should not exclude your friends
if you exclude your friends they will also exclude you
the answer of your maths is correct
do you know the answer of this question
he/she sweeps the floor with a broom
I wash my face with water and soap
could you sweep the house?
shed wears a flowing skirt
she knits a cloth
she knits a sweater
do you know how to braid hair?
she braids her hair
it is not possible to talk to her while she is knitting
did you do well in the examination?
we are happy because you could answer questions in the exam
I was able to answer question in the exam but I failed
do not close your ears!
you cannot plug a round hole with a square
the winter came and my skin is dry and hard
my skin cracks since it is too dry and hard
the police caught the ones who secretly killed our chicken
we will buy food grains in Mizoram
I saw her while we were buying good in a distant place
one tin of rice costs five thousand kyats
his ankle swells
he closes up his ears
cockroach ate our blankets
she has freckles on her face
we surprised him when he killed your chicken
if your foot swells you better take rest
I want to buy a tin of rice
Phirmang and Phirceu are twin brother
they go in pairs
we have a twin
silk skirt is very expensive
the two of them ride on one horse
the two of them ride the bicycle together
would you take me on your horse with you?
the one who expose blankets (dry in the sun) is my sister
two stallions raced
they dried their blanket in the sun
pasture land is good for keeping animals
can you open the lid of the medicine bottle?
if you want to open the lid of the medicine bottle, open it
knife is not necessary for opening the cooking oil can
please unleash the collar off the dog
take off your coat
take off your shoes because the place where you are standing is a holy ground
are you going to take off your hat?
unbutton your shirt
he is too sick that he cannot raise his head
their mare is in heat
since our cow is in heat many male cows are cha sing her
young people are usually fond of joking
if they have too much fun they will be disturbing to others
are you going to pound the rice
they are pounding sticky rice (in a mortar)
Saithang completely defeated Sailing in wrestling
stone mortar is best for pounding chillies
our soil is poor (because of erosion)
if the soil is poor food grains cannot thrive
we have one hundred loads of rice
the cart that transport rice bags over there is ours
would you be able to carry this load?
if you can carry this load, it means you are strong
truck is better than bullock cart for carrying goods
he brings a shirt for me
this watch is worth ten thousand
will your group be able to go?
bad luck and good luck confluence and blend together sometimes
when bad things occured together at the same time it is hard to endure
he is skilful at composing songs
Ṭial◦thang composed a song in praise of Ṭial◦cuai
they dismissed him from his work
he did sin and he was excommunicated
his dismissal  from work was due to his stealing
I no longer saw him after he resigned from his work
it seems that I loved what I am not worthy of
would you be fired from your job?
we urged him not to resign from his job, but he did not want to listen
have you ever disclosed other people's fault?
it is very difficult to reveal one's weakness, but it is good to do it
he is a like whirlwind
he has hunching shoulders
the small Java sparrows migrate to the Chin Hills in the beginning of winter
in Chin way of life, older people should be respected
in the Christian law one person should have only one spouse
giving marriage price is a custom of the Chins
traffic rule is to drive on the right side of the road in Burma also
the greatest religions in the world are Hinduism, Christianity, Islam and Buddhism
we should obey the regulations of the government
it is a good manner to sit properly in front of others
it is the fashion of the Chin women to wear long skirts
it is his mode to be in a bad mode in the morning
long hair is a style for the modern youth
memorization is not the best method of teaching
it is necessary to have a code of laws for governing a country
smoking is a very bad habit
individualism is one of the characteristics of the Chins
he will be preaching next Sunday
he will be preaching next Sunday
he has plenty of time for preaching
his sermon was very good
he will be preaching to us next Sunday
we will dig up sweet yams root
if you read the book of Ecclesiates your thinking will broaden
the small details of the laws of the Jews hinder the Law of God
he has a guilty feeling about his habit of stealing
because he has a guilty conscience of his stealing he does not like to come out among others
I have no guilty conscience
Buddhist monks are bald headed
every country has their own laws
we have forgotten many rituals of the Lai Chin
they squirted  water on the sacrificial chicken with their mouths
he avanged his dead brother
he died when he avenged his dead brother
donot spit in the house
it looks bad when you spit in front of others
it is hard to dig up wild turnips
most of the fish haved scales
plenty of flowers grow in the grassy land
the ones who robbed the grave were caught
robbers exhumed the grave
my rice I am cooking froths over
din't you know the milk you are heating frothed over?
our land is all dried
We need to plants many trees in order that our land will not dried
did you sprinkle salt on the meat?
the time for cleaning the field for sowing has come
have you cleaned the field for sowing?
they have buried the dead body
I want to be buried in my own country (to show my patriotism)
our rice paddy are good since water buried our paddy fields
the one who is planting cabbages is my mom
we plant trees
your blanket is a good kind
every tribe shall worship God
you are the one to carry on the ancestry of your family
who will carry the line of your ancestry if you don't?
it is no good to grumble all the time
the thing that fell down our house was the wind
wind fells down a tree
can you carry this bag of rice?
I saw you while you were carrying wood
when you return please bring me some candies
our God asks of us to love one another
He hit it with a stick on his neck and he died
I ate beans and my stomach got upset
I know now what made my stomach upset
quakers donot believe in arms
sulphur bean serves as one kind of food to the Chins
please come here
bright sun dazzles my eyes
when I was dazzled by the light I cannot see a thing for a moment
I am going to Bawksih to look after the horses
a deer runs swiftly
your hand is so swift
does the horse keeper take good care of the horses?
chalk powder can cause clothes to be white
I am interested in keeping horses
I am sure your garden will be good for a horse ranch
it is difficult to put on a bridle on an untamed horse
the Chins never had cavalry
there are two kinds of saddles, riding saddle and pack saddle
it is not easy to ride a horse without a saddle
stirrup is made of metal and leather
horse carts are used on the plains
crupper is very important for descending the hill
saddle girth is very important for ascending the hill
two stallions raced
could you please let me borrow your horse buttock strap?
I have malaria
there is an epidemic of dysentry
our sow is pregnant
please tell me also when your mare is pregnant
the Chins were animists
malaria is prevalent in low lands
our stallion impregnated your mare a child
small pox has been eradicated
they vaccinated them for small pox
animists used to sacrifice to devils
for animists sacrifice is a means of healing
they used umblemished fowl for sacrificing to demons
an officer shouts at his servant
the child is in great fear and cries
please bring the book here
please go ahead
I bought this horse last year
please sit down here for the time being
you will go to the school before us
the enemy of my enemy is my friend
second world war ended in 1945
as for him he does not oppose people
as for you and me we should not oppose each other
Forgive your enemies but never forget their names
he went to the other side of the river
I saw them go on the hill opposite us
salt melts in the water
when the salt dissolves in water it makes the water salty
glazed jar is good for keeping water
the sun has risen on the other side of the valley
we must oppose bad things always
we should know what we oppose against
opposition is the thing that everyone encounters
every thing has its opponent/contradictor
he is coward
you should not be timid
cowardice cannot bring about anything good
nation will develop only if there is no war
they have not win the war against hunger yet
many people died in war
they fight them with guerilla warfare
he is a guerillla
airplane is one of the best war weapons
they built a fortress to defend the village
many soldiers came
the opposing groups have made peace
when you walk on a slippery road, you should be careful/cautious
we should be careful about our health
it is necessary to have carefulness when climbing a ladder
he was given a warning
we should have caution when driving
you put me in jeopardy
France and Germany fought against each other in war
because they fought in war many people died
plenty of war materials is necessary for war
the Chins rebelled against the government in 1918
war can start with a very small thing
the Mizos rebelled
he is a courageous man
if you are brave you would dare to go
may God guard you
you respect your wife very much
God is our protector
police protects the city
she is very good at respecting her husband
when there is civil war there are many refugees
England is a small country but a great one
Nagaland is in India
there should be Chins in Chinland
Hong Kong was a colony of England
we plant rice in our land
he lets me lie down in the green grass
good people make the interior affairs of the country pleasant
he is a heavy meat eater
please do not be gluttonous at other's home
he looks bad when he is gluttonous (of curry)
the citizens of Myanmar are many tribes
they are on war expedition
horse is a grazer, and elephant is a browser
their enemies plundered them
a good number of people died on their war expedition
the bolundary of Mizoram and Lairam is Ṭio river
I saw a bear while we went on hunting expedition
we shall go on hunting expedition the day after tomorrow
in summer we have plenty of time for hunting/fishing expedition
tomorrow we shall go on fishing expedition
we shall decide tomorrow which area should be located for fields this year
you should also participate where we chose the area for hillside fields
run as fast as you can
come on, be quick, hurry up
we offered him a femaled mythun for marriage price
we are placing a trap for the birds
we place a trap for rats
we are placing a noose for pheasants
we spring a trap for birds
if you like to come to the States you should speak English
his face is pale
the reason why his face was pale was due to his sickness
will you be away a long time?
how long will you be away for your trip?
it is a long time since he has been on his tour
we are going to bake bread
the sting of centepede is painful
do you want to bake bread?
wood is necessary for baking bread
we are stuck in the middle of the road since our bullock cart broke down
they emigrated to other places because their village ruined
he lets his milk spoiled
the milk was spoiled due to warm weather
their bullock cart broke down in the middle of the road
their village was burned down with fire that it was completely ruined
it is not yet a long time since their village's distruction
milk was spoiled
when their village dissolved all the people scattered
the destruction of their village was due to war
the ones who betray their friends are not trust worthy
his friend betrayed him
betrayal does not bring any good
the one who split the wood is my grandfather
my mother cut the blanket along the line with a scissors
he knows very well how to split the wood
he invited his friends to help him (to fight against his opponent)
the reason I invited you is to give me a help against my opponent
they perform a bamboo dance
she sprained her foot in performing the bamboo dance
bamboo dance is one of the dances of the Chins
Babylon was completely destroyed
it is a long time since the complete destruction of the Chaldeans
have you eaten food?
can you take my place?
you should replace the old board with a new board
do you have good appetite?
if you have good appetite you will be fat
cow is a animal that chews the cud (ruminant animal)
a goat chews its cud
he was sick and very thin (and weak)
after he got sick and became weak he retired from his work
he stands on a level ground
he loaded the gun with gun powder
they play soccer on a flat ground
water bottle is best for taking water with on a journey
we shall pack lunch for you
the posts of our house are getting rotten
he hurt his leg while they were dragging logs
they drag a log
in their dragging of the log one man fell off the precipice
C team dragged B team
our boards have shrunk
the reason why our lumbers got shrunk was because of the sun shining on them
they deprived me of food for one day
the string of my bow is too taut
your bow string is so tense that I cannot stretch it
you may stretch tight the string of the violin
you have to tighten your belt
he strangled him (by his hands)
a vine constricts our apple tree
his strangling took place last night
he retarded in growth and all his friends grew ahead of him
people sometimes derided him since he is retarded in his stature
our quavas have ended its fruit season
their voices have died away
it has been a long time since our peaches have ended their fruit season
it is only a short while since their voices died away
the rat that burrows in our field is a bamboo rat
rats burrow their holes
dawn is breaking
is your collar strangling you?
I feel pain at my ankle
I want to buy a basket of millet
count your books
they are planning to determine the area of the fields
we shall discuss together how and where we shall be going
he considers me as nothing
can you read English?
I regard what you have done as a good thing
they are putting up the framework of the house
he hurts his hand when they were putting the framework of a hut
he mistook ("consider") him for an enemy and shot him
he is very tired from counting bags of rice
donot disregard what your teachers say
I need glasses for reading
it will not be proper
don't do it if it is not proper
our bullock keeps itself away/stays alone
he has been hiding away three months
are you ready yet?
I am not satisfied with (the defeat of me) in our wrestling
would it be opportune time for you to go on fishing expedition?
we were not able to travel since it was a little inconvenient for us
as you are comfortable with your living condition you will become happier
it will not be convinient for me to go on fishing expedition
after they got comfortable with their lives they no longer speak to us
your coming here is a good coincidence (with something)
you should try to reconcile your enemy with you
you should be in harmony with your friends
they have reconciled
They fit well together
what you did was plea sing ("be in harmony with") to my eyes
he intended to reconcile although he did not know how
if I do not behave well ("be in harmony with") in your eyes, I would be very grateful if you tell me so
let there be reconciliation on earth
it is necesary to have peace between governments
I shall repair my umbrella
we should try to reform the Church
I put my car at the car repair shop/workshop
reformation of church is always necessary
they sing Hallelujah Chorus in four parts
thier departure just before the flood was providence from God
look, you do not economize here
she lives frugally
you should economise on your spending of money
most of the Chins live frugally eking out their living by small-time trading
she is a deligent person
he has no definite home
you have to save money for the future
I am tired in my work
weary people come to me
if we are too tired at our work we cannot think other thing
the world is full of weariness
they fried meat
they distil liquor
he came while we were drying rice
in dry season all the small streams get dried up
the reason why our small streams are drying up is due to our indiscriminate falling of trees
as for tonight we eat just with deep-fry meat
there are many banyan trees in warm country
the boundary between our field and their field is a river
the road goes along the edge of our field
you must not remove either field or home demarcation lines
Chin State borders Mizoram State
he is drunk of beer
she gets car sick
He is an enthusiast 
since her body is slim she is pretty
the airplane disappeared away slowly
he stood up firmly and spoke
if you stay over night in Falam we shall have a chance to see each other
it has been three nights since we have been camping here
please come to our camping place later
we have constructed the hut (for camping)
we take ten pounds of rice for our journey
we shall need ten pounds of rice for our journey
we shall go to Zahau and spend over night there
will they stay in our house?
we shall go on a hunting expedition
he got harmed where they went on hunting expedition
hailstones fall heavily
are you going to grind flour?
good people donot oppress others
polished rice does not have much vitamins
the ones who repress their own people are bad people
he is grinding his teeth
they are pressing peanut oil
a bad ruler represses his people
the one who is cutting the clothes with scissors is his elder sibling
We only miss sunlight when the its snow
they crosscut the post with a saw
I drank three cups of water and my thirst has been quenched
you may drink water until you are satisfied
for the satiation of your thirst please drink orange juice
you were such an extraordinary person that you could do it
what work have you been doing?
he was given the post of a clerk
working is good for your health
he died at his working place
We, Laimi, have a story of Zawltling and Nganbawm
No one respects him 
knowlege is the treasure of a wise man
We will not live eternally, but my love for you is for forever
it has been three months since they offer him a job
I am working on the construction of my house
we are serving our grand father (working for our grand father)
the one who just eat cannot be any useful
if all you do is eat then you will not be able to take care of yourself
he speaks quickly
please bring eight plates
the warps of my loom are not close together
if your warp is loose, please fix it
the patridges call usually in the evening
I missed you all the more when the patridges call in the evening
do you have ready meat for Christmas?
have one thousand kyats ready for trip to Yangon
your voice is too noisy
would you be able to feed ten guests?
corns do better in new fields
from Tlangkhua to Ṭihbual is about three miles
he has not yet gone
I still want one more cup of water
they chased them away since they were too loud
Falam is dimly visible from Hakha
do not scream at me
please bring two balls of thread
stones roll down into the river
would you please sift flour with a sieve?
I trip over a stone and fall down
he sifted flour with a sieve
sieve is good for sifting flour
if you trip over and fall, your foot might break
they put stones on the road for tripping them
I ran away because the stone was rolling toward me
we are so grateful that you fed us
sea water is salty
light in the light house
they use big ships on ocean
waves can be very dangerous
he stands on the coast of the sea
you have a bad odour
prayer is like a fragrant sacrifice
your leg is too grimy
only after his body is too grmily he took bathe
you have too much grime
he has been coughing that he stopped smoking
let him be bad! until he learned a lesson he will not regret it
the one who is scratching lines on a book is my daugther
he scratches a line on the ground with a stick
you will have to get ready two bags of rice (for the feast)
I am depending on you for my education
it has been three months since we have been depending on him
the sun was down completely when we reached our village
there are only few left who know how to make a Chin violin
we scared the wild sparrows from our field
if you are drunk you might speak out something which you should not
is your book heavy?
we used a hollow wooden block to scare the wild sparrows
they put up scarecrows in the field
she is a relative of ours
his father beqeathed a lot of properties to them
what did your father bequeath you?
he beqeathed them ten thousand 
his father past awat when he was three years old
is your shirt dry yet?
our trees parch since there is no rain
in the Chin custom, the oldest son is the one who inherit
it is through Christ that we shall have inheritance (of salvation)
he inherits two mythuns from his father
the color of your shirt is light blue and it is very pretty
their son is very smart
her mother scolded her daughter severely for stealing some money
he inherited a lot of properties
he said in his last will and testament that his oldest son should inherit his house
he is in anguish because of his daughter
Jacob made his last will to his sons
you must not lose the document of the last will (of your father)
it is very sad when we have to be in anguish regarding our children
in his last will he said his children should receive equally his properties
he is a dishonest person
your cigar is too strong that I get sick
although he was once a good person, he was always accused of stealing and they made him become a dishonest person
there are plenty of bamboos in Burma
bamboo can break ea sily at its joints
he may probably go tomorrow
the reason for your sickness is that you drink too much alchohol
because of you/on account of your help, I could go to school
they are of the same age
the rain falls heavily
I think you can do it
he had already thought out what they were going to do
with malice aforethought he committed the crime
we hope to go to heaven when we die
I have hope to pass my examination
as for this couple they are not afraid of one another since they are of the same age
we expect that you would repay us your debt/we expect you to pay us back your debt
we have expectation that you would help us
I have not thought about this matter
our thought about heaven is according to the teaching of Jesus
my guess is that he will arrive tomorrow
it rains three days
the way of their thinking is seen in what they do
all of a sudden the rain falls
the rain falls
the weeds are dry since there is no rain
the rains fall on us
they buried his corrpse in the grave
his coffin was made with teak
please bring me a lei of orchids
he and I are of the same age
they hang out together more since they are of the same age
a herd of wild pigs eat the grains of our fields
a troop of monkeys ate up all our corn/maize
the one who stacked up a stonewall was my grandfather, and a flower grows on his stonewall
you should lay the bricks properly
she is a relative of mine
do you have any blood relationship with him?
you should be congenial to one another
if you are not in harmony others will beat you
he does not intend at all to go away
please tell us the outline of your book that you are going to publish
I never absolutely went to Mandalay
he came down from the mountain
please come down from the tree
our peaches are wormy
he is now so arrogant that it is no longer possible to be friend with him
after he became an officer he became quite arrogant
pine apple is very nice
a sians have high cheek bones
if you want to scrape the dirt of the courtyard, you may go ahead and do it
last year we gathered a large number of fish at the time of spawning
they sit together in a large number
our harvest is good and our barn houses are full
we carry our things in rucksacks
poisonous snakes are very dangerous
to be in between a hard and rock, i.e. to have a bad experience ("snake after enemy before")
after such a bad experience, I don't dare go with them anymore
I shall not be able to pay you back my debt yet
we shall reimburse you the expenses you incurred on your trip
compensations for war damages will be received
the Americans are affluent
for some peopple the richer they become the better the are
all people like riches
kings have magesty
he asked me to follow him willy nilly that I went with him
a large crowd of people followed him
I saw a herd of cows
he was arrested b y the soldiers as he was coming down the hill
they were shot while they were coming down from the hill
when they came down to attack Chuncung village, one hundred of its defenders were killed
he is a dishonest person
please scrape the dirt with a dust pan
please scrape the dirt with a dust pan
immigrants should learn from Ruth
it is impossible to succeed with dishonesty/crookedness
keep your dishonesty to yourself
I have a headace
it is almost time to go back to school
You will have to dance
You should go to sleep early
I am grateful four your help
We should not feel hopeless (depress)
I still am thankful
Thy word is sweeter than honey
All all must have our own story to tell
Locked your doors before you went to sleep
I feels dizzy
swimming is good for health
I hardly approve of their behavior
They live happily 
extend your arm to me dear
let hold our hand forever
The enemies attacked both our flanks
One hundred dollar will be enough for me for this yeaer
the food you gave me is sufficient for me
many people have crossed over the mountain/have died
we shall hunt the birds (pheasant) at their resting places
it is quite a pleasure to hunt birds at their resting places
two birds perch on the branch of a tree
Chins believe that the cry of the patridges announces rain
my husband is a school teacher
I shall go home
how beautiful you are!
there are three eggs in the nest
there is adultery for women in the Lai language.
how many feet is the breadth of your house?
there is a lot of meat on the thigh of a cow
they went in the moonlight to their village
please light the pinetorch
I am in deep anguish
my child sickness makes me restless
you should finish clearing your field by January
he cut his foot with an adze when clearing the forest for cultivation
the child knows how to crawl now
you like wandering too much
it's now three months since our child has begun crawling
Dawtku got married to Dawtceu
the Chin no longer has a carved board to display enemy's heads
they went upstream
you used up all your time for wandering
we have been wandering for the last ten years
we the Chins are also wandering all over the world
he is a vagabond
the Chins call the Burmans and Indians vai
the husks of paddy and corn are good for pigs
he lost his way and wandered away
he went to hunt wild animals
he pretended to be innocent
he got killed by wild animals as he wandered in the jungle
he wants to go hunting
Lord Jesus died on the cross
I saw a cross on the hill
criminals were crucified
the criminals were crucified so that others may fear to do the crime
I saw my lord on the cross
he is an unstable person
a garland of marigold
if you are fickle-minded you will not be successful
can your child crawl?
he hills of the Chin Hills are very steep
donot write on the wall
a strong man can carry thirty wall boards
it is quite difficult to eat Indian corn
they could not winnow the rice since the wind blew too hard
we use winnow to winnow/sift the rice
we never saw swans in the Chin Hills
they have not yet cleared the jungle for cultivation
we shall collect dry twigs
two bundles of blanket
I shall buy a bundle of cloth
this is my book
I shall go over there just for awhile
please come here for a minute
we have no newspaper in Chin
the top of your head and the underneath of your heel
a cat lies down under the table
they live in the forest ("under the shadow of the forest")
in what standard/grade are you studying?
he remains at the school
what is the balance of your money? ("how much of your money is left?")
we left him at home
the wall of our house are of pine wood
the rich have plenty of money
she knows very well how to weave
she knows very well how to knit sweaters
I will leave my things for you if I go abroad
let me measure your height
the surveyors measured the heights of the hills
now is the month of July
we are taking rest under the shadow of a treee
he sees his reflection/image in the water
the Chins use slips of bamboo in constructing their houses and making various kinds of baskets
our chicks have matured and left their nest;
our kids have matured and live independently
they have plenty of grapes and walnuts to sell
I will not rescind my promise
Promise me that you wont tell anyone
I promise to be careful
he is hunting in the jungle
Chicken are scratching the ground
if you eat too much mangoes you will have diarrhoea
it is better to try hard rather than envying others
beef is very expensive
as for this meat it has more tendon than flesh
peach has seed, meat and skin
a butcher sells meat at a butcher's shop
We are building a house
The house buidler is not feeling well
they sing a song
they brew beer
I like hot water
we are now doing well in our living
the word became flesh and dwelt among us
we are happy that you would like to live with us
he made a celebration with a cow over the killing of a bear
he goes hunting games in the morning and evening
hunting ground is about two miles from village
corn soup is a good healthy food
I saw a skunk in the jungle
in Chin proverb, it is said, you can wish anything
what I used to dream is to become a teacher at a University
will your wish/dream become a reality?
I have no time for dreaming
have you ever been dreaming?
ticks suck the blood of animals
there are tall buildings in Yangon
papaya can flourish in warm countries
they go on the sea by ship/boat
we cut the bamboos with knives
we let out the water of the pond and caught the fish
we use knife for cutting down bamboos
your meat soup is very good
they use tobacco leaves for cigarettes
wild cats used to catch chickens
he/she is our close relative
they are our kith and kin
flying squirrels wander from on top of trees
tonight we are going to eat stewed meat with rice
wool coat is very warm
the Chins used gall bladder for augury
is there still who know the art of augury in Chinhills?
shooting a wild animal is very prestigious to the Chins
we honed knives with rasp
would you please lend me your rasp?
as for eating raw meat it is easy to get diarrhea
in Chin custom, the beloved guest is given the part of the body of the animal from the diaphragm up
the Chin forbid to kill lemur
there are still many elephants in Burma
the wind blows against the branches of the tree and they shake
he is carving a pig trough
he is cracking jokes
they are chiseling the rock
the post you planted in the ground is so stable that it does not shake a bit
he will come after finishing making the pig trough
all he does is cracking joke
they used chisel when they chiseled the rock
he was late because of his cracking of jokes
he cut his foot with an adze when making a pig trough
chisel is essential for chiseling rock
lime is very sour in taste
ivory is quite expensive
otter catches fish
sailam path is not a paved road
they winnow the chaff from the grains
a big tick bit me and it swelled like a big boil
I want to build a house
he spent twenty thousand for building his house
they gave their son the name of Isaac
his voice is still good because he has been singing all the time
piano is an essential accompaniment to singing
he is a man greatly interested in hunting
breech loading shot gun is very good for shooting animals/games
Hrang Kap is a sharp hunter
A shooter is mr Kap
he gives them a leg of the animal he killed (to show the good relationship he has with them)
we can walk one stage in a day
they are at the police station
we are of the same blood and flesh
I heard the bark of a barking deer
venison ("deer meat") tastes real good
cedntipede is quite dangerous
they beat the horn of the mythun to keep rythm of the dance
quill of porcupine is used by the Chins for an embroidering needle
our uncle gave us a leg of the animal
Chins took slaves from other ethnic groups in olden days
we should be free from the slavery of bad habits
the Chins used to enslave those who were captured in war
my work enslaves me
there is no evidence of your enslaving me
soldiers salute their officers
you should fined an animal for alleging him of theft
did your marriage price include an animal head?
my grandfather displayed many animal skulls on the wall
I shall have a hair cut
the one cutting the wood overthere is my younger brother
we have to say that anyone who defeat his enemy completely is a strong man
the one who is talking about her wishes overthere is my sister
they defeated their enemies completely
discussing together our wishes is a great pleasure
God counts even your hair
stretch out your hand
straighten the crooked nails
raise your hands above your head for stretching them
I like black ribbon
may God join you in marriage
you and me were not meant for marriage
you should comb your hair in the morning
my arm is painful that I cannot comb my hair
his hair became all gray because he thought too much
being gray hair is the beauty of the elderly
she does not braid her hair today
her braid is pretty
we comb our hair with a comb
She is a beautiful woman
my love is so beautiful that all the bachelors want to marry her
her hair knot is quite big
computer is very useful
he is a very useful person
even if you love your people, they will not use you if you are not useful
the cocks are fighting
I shall raise my house two feet
I put money in my pocket
the British measured the altitude of Hakha town (6000 ft above sea level)
python is the biggest kind of snakes in the Chin Hills
shoes are made of leather
some animal eat elephant grass
please give me the dried meat that I put above the hearth
pangolins eat ants
this grass is irritating on skin
the pollen of hay caused me rash all over my body
there are wild animals and domesticated animals
there is a zoo in Yangon
the pollen of the rice stalks caused me skin rash
fifteen youngmen went on a hunting expedition
one day is a day of rest in seven days
we are going to cook animal intestines by stuffing it with sticky rice
syringe is used for injection of medicines
as for this age, dance of dead is performed when there are simple festivals
we have a dead person who died of drowning
he was killed by a tiger and he died an unnatural death
those who died unnatural death are buried in the cemetry outside of the village
a gust of wind (caused by the death of somebody who died of unnatural death) is blowing
vultures gather together where there is a carcass
dogs fight when there is not enough bones
he is grabbing at anything without shame ("he lives by putting on a bone on his forehead")
his death was awful (i.e. he died in a awful way and I feel terrible about it)
I put on a hat because the sun is hot
they fought with swords and ten of them died
they cannot break the pond ea sily
sinews is not good for eating
wildgoats are surefooted animals and they can run even on cliffs
fat is good for making soap
she anoints herself with oil
Christians believe that Jesus is the anointed one of God
Samuel anointed David for the king of Israel
hill people like fermented meat
soap is good for washing clothes
cow is a domesticated animal
it's a long time since we met
this house is seventy feet long
his children no longer recognize him since he has not been back for too long
longevity is God's blessing
the length of this room is thirty feet
I would like to have a long bamboo pole
lenghthen your cords
they said that meat of rabbit and chicken have similar taste
A meat eating animal killed a bird
we respect the teachers (male)
nurses/midwives are badly needed in rural villages
hunters would like to have shot a large wildgoat
although Kap Thang made a free distribution of meat to the whole village, our family did not get one
they get one piece each of the free meat
although I want to make a free distribution of meat I cannot do it
hunters often hunt games
just for the sake of appearance ("like a female deer just for the sake the beauty")
animals are hunted in the forest and jungle
the skin of his face wrinkles
funnel is necessary for putting petrol
they put rice in the pouch
tonight in the moon light we will hunt edible frogs
what are you doing?
I am just taking a walk
donot point your finger at me
they poke the mangoes with a long stick
he penetrated in his back with a knife
the reason for his skin being wrinkled is because he is old now
we cleaned the gun with a ramrod
donot criticise others
you will be disparaged just as you disparaged others
a male dog copulated a female dog
we can pick out the cotton wool with out hands
he picked out the dough with his big hand (instead of a spoon)
she is a cotton picker
do you like it? I like it somewhat
he is a rather careless person
eating oyster can increase one's strength
they polish maize
he discouraged our plan to build by pointing the negatives, so we stopped
she is a pessimistic person
thirty people went
my friend invites me to a dinner
tomorrow evening I will invite my friends for dinner
I was happy to receive your invitation letter/card
it's around sixty decades since the Chins have been living in the Chin Hills
the one who put on black belt is my younger brother
he takes one minute to put on a belt
a spider makes its web
a fly is caught in the web of a spider
he shot a wild pig and made a feast with a pig to celebrate it
the Chins take pride in celebrating the killing of an wild animal with making a feast
your house is not upright
a drunkard staggers when he goes
since your house post is not straight it will fall down
as he was staggering we knew that he was drunk
people ascribed the drowning of a son to the previous misdeed of his father
a tumbler fell on a rock and it was broken into pieces
we are making a headway/progress in our work today
we use glue for gluing papers
I have a sewing machine
I accidentally bit my finger
a wild cat kills a chicken
he died from the biting of a mad dog
I need a bag of sand
blood stained his shirt
let my people go
let your will be done on earth as it is in heaven
he persevered with determination to complete his work
she carries a lot of potatoes in her wicker head basket on her back
in the Christian era we no longer make payment to our uncles for the death of our fathers
We want to have fun 
they carry their wicker head baskets on their backs with straps
Study hard while you are youth
although he tried very hard to study he could not pass the exam
he aimed at the boulder, but missed it
she is pregant now ("a child has originated in her womb now")
God was already before the earth existed
my mother's womb is the beginning of my existence
I miss the village of my birth ("place of my origin")
the younger children could not understand (used by older folks for endearment)
red jacket
he drank alchohol until all his eyes got red
my father does not allow me to play
corporal is in between lance corporal and sergeant
about a four days old baby is called red orchid in endearment
God is the one who creates man
he is the maker of this pot ("he is the one who made this pot")
mistletoe lives on another tree
the story was of his own making/creation
artificial flower has no fragrance
it is hard to endure your sarcasm and contempt
my brother made for me earrings
if you want to have friends you must not be sarcastic to others
to show his displeasure to me, he tried to carry rice in a bag of two hundred pounds
he looks down upon me
majority ethnic group usually oppresses the minority ethnic group
during the reign of Nero, the Christians were persecuted
the persecution of the Church started quite early (in the history of the Church)
it will be very difficult to make our country better
tangerine is very sweet and nice
do you really know it?
donot go on speaking what you donot really know
he is a handsome person
are you going? Yes! I am going
if he is a wiseman he should know at least this much
let us not quarrel
do you want to take asprin? ("head ache medicine")
we have a small calf of mythun
he carries lumber on his shoulder
she is a generous person
the first missionaries to the Chins came in 1899
Arthur and Laura Carson were the first missionaries to the Chins
there are one hundred students in our school
there are twenty colleges in our country
I want to go to school very much
I am going to the school (the buildings)
in ancient days nations had their own kings
A king wife is call a queen
he and I are kith and kin (i.e. we can sacrifice together)
you caught more fish than me ("you outdid me in fishing")
we shall pave the road tomorrow
those who opened the way for us to get education were our ancestors
they have cleared the road yesterday
I shall try to open ways for your education
the one who is making a cow overthere is my son
he makes two dolls
he uses pieces of cloth and mud for making dolls
please make me a doll
you may make your bed to suit your own liking
my friend is very clever at mimicking others
last night they were making a mimicry and they had lots of fun
he is willing to give his life for his country
his willingness to give his life for his country saved the lives of many people
his generosity in contributing money to religious purposes helped many people
since my mom did not allow me to go to the river I did not go
His father allows him to travel
I will not forget the fact that you did not allow me to go astray
they catch fish with a hook
I am quite comfortable in my bed
since I was not comfortable at where I sat I moved
the Chins made idols with clay
do you want to buy a shirt?
they use tongue and groove boards for walls and floors
his father is a medical doctor
there are only few lady doctors in our country
we are poor people
it is very hard to be poor
we were hard up because we were poor
it is difficult to live in a country of poverty
we cannot do many things because we are poor
we were living in a land of poverty
we are always poor
there are many poor people in our country
the poor are humble
as of now the Chins number around four hundred thousand
you regard me as a stranger
she pinched me at my hand
she nibs the tips of the mustard plants
he wanders around without a shirt in the winter and I wonder he does not feel cold
if you feel cold, wear a warm coat
jackal and fox are very much alike
Are you a thift or not?
they are poor, but they are honest people
if one is too poor it is easy to steal
donot nib the tips of the mustards
please pluck that rose
donot pinch me at my hand
I feel cold
it's no good to be quarrelling all the time
those who cause quarreling are bad people
it not good to smoke
in the Chin Hills, November is beginning of autumn
our work yesterday was hard and rough that we were all stiff and sore all over
her face is dull and stiff (i.e, she looks gloomy)
she sat there with a dull and stiff face
please put away the leftover food for the pig
if you don't like it, never mind
do not find excuse for what you have said
most of our houses do not have ceilings
nine in the morning is the time when the largerst number of office workers go to office (i.e. the peak of working hour)
he died at the height of his life
are you Kamlo? No! I am not
please refrain from urinating (ie, don't pee right now. like, can you hold it?)
I have refrained for so long
I am fed up of pork
I will feel safe to go with you ("in the company of you")
I shall go with you ("alongside of you")
I received a letter from my friend ("from the place of my friend")
he was their servant
they talk secretly about his theft
he sits by my side
we travel by the flank of a mountain
there are trees on the side of the road
whether they be old or young, they all got flu shots
I shall call you later by whistling
they are quite well off
since he became well off, it began hard to talk to him
in weal or woe I shall be her faithful husband
they argue to each other lightly
snake poison is also used for antidote ("for the killing of poison")
we shall prepare tea ("boil tea with water")
an anthill bulges
do not dip you hand while the water is hot
they surround their house with spikes
would you please boil me a cup of tea?
I want to buy a hammer
they hammered iron in a forge
hey hammer hot iron on an anvil ("forge-strike-NOM")
I submitted an application form for a clerical post
they beat hoes on the anvil
he excused himself for failing exam by saying that he was sick
he has no excuse for failing the test
his father is a black smith ("make metal related tools")
do not let fire get you while you work on metal tools
watch out, lest you bump your head against the door
they are pounding corn in the mortar
two male cows gored one another
those who agree, please nod your heads
we pound rice in the mortar
I shall wash my shirt
has your daughter begun menstruating?
you should pound the corn in the mortar
they accused him of a crime although he did not make any mistake
they did not lay his corpse in view for public to see in their home
we use ladle for scooping soup
they scoop rice with a spoon
do you know how to draw a picture?
have you drawn the plans for your journey?
you will be able to feed yourself if you know how to draw pictures
she knows how to knit a sweater
donot sin!
a boy and a girl committed a sin
if you are bad you will suffer as much
do not commit sin with other people daugther
the wages of sin is death
the road is slippery, therefore be careful, you might fall accidentally
the words I spoke I spoke them unintentionally
in case you meet him, please give him this book
Kamlo and Kamthang wrestled
a snake came while Kamlo and Kamthang were wrestling
the one who is putting up the hut overthere is my brother (said by his sister)
we have erected a hut in the jungle
Satan tempted Jesus
whether he makes mistakes or not my child is my child
human beings make transgressions
his case was decided and found gulty
he condemned the sons of others but he did not want to condemn his own son
he was condemned to death
he is accused of theft ("crime of stealing")
the accusation made against him was wrong
the leads of a fishing net are made of lead
his body lay for public view at his house
we clasped hot coal with tongs
would you come to glean at the field?
her mother preened for her the eggs of her head lice
a book is a precious thing to those who know it
gold and silver are different in their worth
Mr Thang was popular among the people that they elected him
gold is precious therefore many people like it
we praise the glory of Jesus Christ
he lost twenty thousand kyats last month
they lost a soccer game
he failed in maths last exam
if you fail in the exam, your parents will be sorry
it is difficult for him to carry on business because he lost two hundred thousand kyats
if you fail in the exam, you will have to repeat it
his failure in the exam was due to lack of studies
his loss in his business was due to demonitization of currency notes
their losing in the football game was due to bad weather
he is a popular man
gold is precious precious
gold is a precious thing
independence day is a red letter day ("a precious day")
gold is a very precious thing
I would like to have wisdom more than gold
do you wear a watch?
a clock is hanging on the wall
what time is it?
he can go four miles in one hour
I bumped my foot against a chair
watch out, lest you may be gored by a wild cow
he agreed and he nodded his head
a bull gored a boy
my gun kicks me ("bump against me at the fire")
we wash our clothes with soap
we can follow an animal by its trails
a deer slipped past the hunter unnoticed
what you said is not clear in its meaning
the works we are doing are overlapping
I donot know the meaning of this English word
we crossed each other on the way but we did not see each other
since we missed one another we have to meet again
the missionaries blazed the trail in the Chin Hills that we are now Christians
blazing the trail would be a hard task
had not the missionaries blazed the trail in the Chin Hills we should have remained non-Christians
the trail blazers of the Gospel in the Chin Hills were American Baptist missionaries
his abstinence from smoking gives him a long life
please pick up paddy seeds with your fingers
it is not easy to pick up a needle with finger and thumb
I measured my hog and it is six fists at its girth
we pound rice in the mortar with a pestle
husband and wife divorced and their properties were divided by mutual agreement
cymbal can sound loud
if she is not as popular as she is pretty it will be her fault
you should have concern for the people that you may be acceptable to them
we should glorify our God
the greatest glorification we can give to our God is obeying His laws
may all glory be yours
there is a small waterfall nearby our house
let glory and honour be yours
let your glory be shown
we catch fish with net
since the rain fell heavily we cannot go
we squeeze the juice of the oranges
the one who is wringing a blanket overther is my mother
we milk our cows
please do not bother me while I am squeezing the fruits
the cow kicked him where he milked
the rain falls on us and we get all wet
the main pillar/post is usually the biggest in the house
if the pillar of your house is not firm your house will not be firm
he is the most important person in our village ("he is the pillar of our village")
the wine they are brewing will ferment in one week and ready for drinking in three months
sulphur bean serves as one kind of food to the Chins
please come here
bright sun dazzles my eyes
when I was dazzled by the light I cannot see a thing for a moment
his horse is very strong
I am going to Bawksih to look after the ponies
a deer runs swiftly
chalk powder can cause clothes to be white
I am interested in keeping horses
I am sure your garden will be good for a horse ranch
I can no longer fall asleep after the dog barked
is your work easy?
your help relieved me a lot
olive trees do not grow in Lai country
olive oil was used for medicine also
we shall stack firewood
the door opens by itself
if you want to stack firewood we may do so tomorrow
I shall open the door for you
would you please open the door for me?
there is a mole on his throat
he is a gluttonous person
he is poor since he is too gluttonous
shall we wait for your arrival?
nobody like him because he is too gluttonous
she is a gluttonous person
we know that you were waiting for us
they lay in wait for him on the way and killed him
you will turn to the right
he sits on his right side
we shall start our work early
we will tell you when we begin our work
we have begun building the house yesterday
we get plenty of cotton this year
I buy yarn at the shop
my mother dries cotton in the sun
my grandmother spins the thread into balls with a spinning machine
they teased the cotton with a bambo bow
they made mattress with cotton
your thread is too thin
she was spinning the whole night
are you going to take your book?
Please pick up Ṭhaku when you come
are you going to accept the job?
we are taking water by water pipes and the distance is one mile long
they carried the sick perosn in a stretcher
no one will beat her when it comes to beauty and charm
Sungsung beats Tintin in the beauty contest
it's apparent that he is a strong man
he gets a retribution for his misdeeds
when your village is visible we shall stop for rest
the flames are leaping slowly and loudly
please stop your speaking
have you eaten yet ?
Bual Mang and Ngun Khen are divorced
you should stop smoking
you should not divorce your wife
the sun is too hot that the young plants die off
what should we do so that our young sprouts may not die off?
your floor is pretty smooth
I slip because your floor is too sleek
salt dissolves in water
the pot was crushed into pieces
my love, I saw you in my dream
good night! ("good dream")
he was in a trance
the bamboo rat's head surfaces from its hole
I saw a huge snake
your guavas are just about ready to ripe
your log trap caught (pressed) a quail
I dream a dream
this thing is beyond my dream
as for this year there are people who store up food in fear that famine might occur
It is I that the love you
suicide is because of cowardice
do not fight among yourselves !
this is the book I want
these are the books I want
I want that book
that is the book I want
those things
those are the books I want
those things
those are the books I want
every one of them wants to own a book individually
he wants to live alone
if your smoking continues to be bad like this, you will get sick
I don't know how to say how great his words are
this morning I am not as usual
our pumkin is not ripe enough to eat yet
after they discussed thoroughly, they reply us
red silk yarn blanket is a Chin favorite
Spider made it web
the spider yarns its web
your red peppers are not spicy
your smoking is really bad
your peppers is not very spicy
we have blessings today
God gives us blessings
her father blessed her
it is good to eat porridge when one gets sick
what is the cost of your book?
today our goods do not sell very well
if your goods donot sell well you have to lower the price
fowls have sexual intercourse
he gave a female mythun for the marriage price of his wife
when the head of the snake emerged from the stone hole, all the people were frightened
your goods are quite inexpensive
if your goods are too expensive, no one will want to buy them
your goods are much more expensive than I have expected
thing which are too cheap are usually not very good in quality
today I sold one hundred bags of rice
the eagle carried away a cock and a hen while copulating
he gave them female mythun for the marriage price of his wife
you do not need to pay price for my daugther's marriage but you only need to love her
gold is expensive
gold is as expensive as it is useful
today you are very busy
you were quite free yesterday though
are you ready yet?
watch is expensive
it is also good because it is expensive
he is agile ("his speed is light")
Our mathran (half cow and half buffalo) ate other people's field, and we had to compensate
the house that is built with bamboos is not very sturdy
who was your bride's maid?
are you going?
O my goodness! ("O my liver")
either you or I must go
he was sick and his sight is blurred
he is still afraid of his wife even though he is quite drunk
he does not know how to drive a car
he engraves tattoo on his arms
you must know how to drive a car
the blanket of my late grandfather that we kept is so old that it rots
you will be guilty if you commit a murder
you are not to be blamed for not mastering Greek
he is rebuked for the wrong he has done
he was blameless in what he has done
she strokes her cat often
he is a handsome youngman
your shirt goes very well with you
he is cockier as he becomes more handsome
rice pollen irritates my skin
rice pollen irritates my skin
his skin is quite dark
he is an idiot
he becomes totally crazy because he drinks too much
he is very angry that he loses his head
he is crazy about education
he is confused in his mind
because he has teeth no more he holds and rolls food in his mouth
my love, I still love you even when I am a bit tipsi.
he could seduce her with drug
he could not induce her by drug
his other body parts are also very dirty
it's difficult to walk because it is dark
they will be seperated as sheep and goats are seperated
have you cast your ballot in the election?
I shall keep on eating even if you wink at me with disapproval
when he was speaking I was dozing
we were so tired that we just dozed
we have chicken meat (to go along with rice) today
your meat curry is really good
gravy should not be eaten by itself
eating meat with beer is very tasty ("that one can forget one's name")
I want to shave my beard
aren't you going to cut your hair?
comb is necessary for cutting hair
goat's milk is very rich
have you eaten a tail of a tiger?
we shall start making fire
something like tongues of fire fell on them
they cast them into the flame
the forest burns and fire sparks
we usually dry meat on the rack above the fire
it is possible to study with a pine torch if one really wants to do so
I have a burn on my hand
please collect the short firebrand
don't you let the flame consume you!
those who can walk in the heat of fire would be very few
this is your book, isn't it?
this flower smells good, doesn't it?
Indians like flour
do you know how to make charcoal?
the screw of the tail of my gun barrel gets loose
your word is a lamp unto my feet
there is fire where there is smoke
chimney
if you go to the jungle, you should bring a match
the backsight of a gun is on the tail of the barrel
we are going to make a camp fire tongiht
we need brazier in cold season
single barrel shot gun
double barrel shot gun
ramrod is used for cleaning the barrel of the gun
there is haze in summer months
volcano erupts
it's cold and we warm ourselves near the fire
they want to warm themselves near the fire because it is cold
you said these words when we were warming ourselves together near the fire
they use brazier for warming up themselves
I happened to touch am ember and my palm got all burned
a sarcastic expression used for refusing an offer, refuting a charge or accusation
do you want pick some wild apples?
the one who is bandading someone's wound is my sister
I feel much better after they bandaged my wound
a nurse bandages my wound
he is just a human being
he just said like that
he is no ordinary person (i.e. he is an extra ordinary person)
we are just walking without any real purpose/just loitering
he wraps cloth around his head
the place where they bandadged his wound is all pale
please turn on the machine
donot turn around your head
there is no place for turning around at the corner of the road
be careful when you turn around your head
he is now satisfied in every thing (as in sound sleep)
without you I can never be sastisfied
then I will have pity on you if you cannot be satisfied
he twists and turns what I said
he is happy and smiles
he looks at me smilingly
have you peeled off the pumkin ?
she sideglanced me intensely yet I pretended not to notice her wink
can you give me a hair cut?
peach is very delicious
we are going to have a meeting at 3 PM.
many persons receive gifts at Christmas
he is a weakling
the righteous are trusted by their friends
he is a wise person
wise people do not talk much about their skill
could he be a real wise man?
he is quite a bright and smart person
he is a thief and a swindler
although he is lean, he is quite strong
my humanity cannot tolerate it
my human nature does not like it
he is a scoundrel
fool are never wise, they said
a slick and slippery person
slick and slippery persons never ever true words
he is a frivolous person and that he breaks dishes whenever he washes them
He is a useless man
a haughty person can never have a true friend
she is quite a romantic person
stubborn person
he shot the qual with a slingshot
the youths are the hope of the future
they are a well to do family
we should help the poor and the needy
those who look down on immigrants are bad people
cruel officers persecute their people
cowards are often loud
a courageous person does what he thinks is righteous despite his fear
we are poor people
the rich speak as they like, the rain falls as it likes
poor people don't have money
their father was a house servant but his children became well-to-do persons
Ceukung is worth calling a good man
he is an absent-minded person and he keeps forgetting things
he is a dull boy and he finds it difficult to learn new things
you should be aware of a woman who is loose in morals
a sluggard is always sleeping
Nichin is a well behaved woman
clever people talks about cunning stories (usually about sex) and all the people listen
they buried the corpse in the grave
the word you spoke was good
the one who travels more tend to be more broad-minded
how much profit did you make this year from your business?
canon balls are quite expensive
he is keeping unkempt
some died and some survived
their ruler has sympathy on his subjects
poor Lianlian, his wife died recently
werwolf can live like normal human being but they have tails they said
your table is very smooth
that your skin is so smooth is because you eat good
you have a visitor
visitors who come quite often
an authorised person to ask the hand of a young woman for a young man
I am going to plane wall boards today
the population of Myanmar is around 48 million
he is pleasantly plump
even if the parents are quite sleek (chubby) their kids are so thin
the cost of postage stamps is so high that it is difficult to send things
we sat in the shade of a wild banana tree
what is your name? ("who is your name?")
Fingrilh was the pseudonym of Kawipeng under which he wrote
there is a landslide between Kalemyo and Hakha
there is a landslide on the road
we are stuck because of the landslide
he has a bad reputation
he was quite famous before he had a bad reputation
it is very difficult to travel because of so many landslides
his name has been registered in the sixth standard class register
I did not see your name at the registration
he is famous in Hakha
he acts different after he got famous
he has been registered in the list of the tenth standard
he has been reinstated
it's not yet long since he has been reinstated
please tell me when the torch extinguished
the one who named me was my father
my father gave me my name
there are plenty of meanings when they gave me my name
my grandfather was very famous at his time
the main reason he became famous was because he was handsome
the pastor has enrolled me (in Church's book of believers)
he has a good reputation because of his humility
there is no one who does not like good reputation
our young corn plants are all eaten up by the ants
our corn seeds have germinated
please tell me when your corns began to germinate
the British ruled Myanmar for a long time
he knows English
he can speak English
a young girl smiles at me
our dry meat is all eaten up by worms
he is blind in one eye
she has a big eyes
this wood-board has too many knots
advanced in age people have eye bags
I considered you as the appple of my eyes
upper eye lashes and lower eyelashes are never the same in length
eyes flies are pestering me
he has squint eyes
he should not be derided just because his eyes squint
a blind person came to Jesus
if the blind person do not know that he is blind it would not be easy to lead him
close your eyes
he said, I can still see while I closed my eyes
should you meet a sudden death, how are we going to live?
he worked doggedly to complete his work
he can no longer see because his eyes are dry and gone
he does not want to live anymore after his eyes were gone
yesterday, a ghost scared us
we call eyes glasses in Lai as old people eyes
may God give you countenance
we are straining our eyes for your arrival
he has squint eyes
your loving me should not depend on my eyes being squinted
he is sleepy
your are quite hollowed-eye since you got sick
he is hollowed-eye because he was sick
if you are tired you may go to sleep
we can no longer stay awake after heavy drowsiness
He threatened his fellow-workers that he was going to resign
magic is quite a trick
magician, conjurer
she keeps a close eyes on me
grapes are sweet
Christains use grape juice in the Lord's Supper
we used grape vines as a fence
donot covet other people's properties
you were in my imigination
she shed drops of tears
dust got into my eyes
eyebrows hair
former chiefs usually travelled with servants who accompanies them
because he still can blink, it is apparent that he is not dead
although I winked him, he cannot understand
he was so tired that he can barely blink his eyes
my friend, who was the girl winking at me ?
in the twinkle of an eye he went away
we have a story to tell to all people/every person
let's go where the crowd is
we want a government elected by the common people
the bridegroom and his bride are now coming
the spring of your gun is very strong
he hunts with breech loading gun and breech loading knife
our wall is rotting
do you like egg yolk?
a hawk catches a chicken
the big bird was hovering over the village and all the villagers fled
the chicken really fear the eagle
he fell from the back of the horse because his horse was running too fast
I stroke my cat
we are going to the cemetary
he was disgraces publicly because people knew that he was a thief
it is very unpleasant to be a place where defamation and scandal are instigated
he regrets only after he was disgraced publicly
evil children bring public disgrace and shame on their parents
all our house posts are decaying
put two pieces of firewood in the fire to keep it burning
God created man in His image
the earth did not have any shape before God created it
the transfiguration of Lord Jesus ("the change of the appearance of Lord Jesus")
even your image will not be around tonight !
just good looking will not bring about anything
the color of your coat is pretty/nice
the feature of your house is beautiful
although she is ugly she has a good heart
my friend is not good looking
your dog is quite ugly but lovely
the night is dark
ladies still like him despite his ugliness
we cannot see anything because it was too dark
a young lady made a parting of her hair
those who does not have umbrella uses tarpulin for rain protection
I heard the sound of  the trumpet/bugle
we do not have a bugler
this year paddyt does not produce well
the three wise men of the east brought myrrh, frankensens and gold
the kernel of walnuts is very good
which one is more important: to have quantity or quality?
those who fear ghost are cowards
since he is almost blind he no longer dare to go around at night
if your price are too cheap you will not profit for yourself
the government can lower the cost of things as well as heighten them
you please start the song
Are you going to work?
a muleteer looksafter the mules
if she is like her mother, she will be very beautiful
it looks like rain therefore I dare not go
they have similarity as mother and daughter
the sound of a fife comes from a mountain
he has gone back home
she has been reconciled and reunited in the family after one month's estrangement
I will call you after I got back home
when she returned to her husband her children were very happy
if you dip your hand into hot water, your hand will get burned
I will chose him other than you
it will be better if you don't go than going
it will be good if you take rest
we catch fish with net
aquirium
there is not much left trout in Timit river
which one is tastier between fresh fish and dry fish?
I gave him five hundred for land tax
please wait for me
please wait for me
he hurt his head and he was stunned for awhile
we are anxious for your arrival
it is hard for us to wait as we are too anxious for your arrival
today I got a lot of money
is it okay to go? (lit. will you get to go?)
if your meat is gritty, it needs to be washed
people participating in fishing expedition is taken to be one of the most pleasant excursions
we yearn for fishing expedition
going on fishing expedition is my favorite excursion
I miss my mother
listen to what I say
obey your teacher
he likes to work very much
in fact, in truth
he likes to play very very much
serious matters
do you repent of your sin?
I saw a small red mouse running around
a doctor listens to my pulse
you should obey your parents
a doctor listens to my chest with a stethoscope (listening device)
this medicine is good for me
I miss you greatly
I have been missing you for a long time
I like you very much
I am sad
blessed are those who are sad because they will be comforted
he weeps because he is sorry
hey met a lot of sorrow
I repent of my smoking
there can be no reconciliation without repentance
we ought to forgive one another
we receive forgiveness from God
I apologize to you because I am wrong
you should make an apology to your friends
he dealt with him subtly and killed him
he hit me without proper warning
when Menrihai falls in love with Thlihranthang, her father was happy
I am very happy
Oh mine! you yourself come! ("the very you come")
a young woman and a young man fall in love
a child is playing
cradle
a girl cries
boys are playing soccer
we should help the orphans and widows
The Lai Chin people honored the killing of wildboar
they hit him at his shin with a stick
if you fall backward your neck will break
be careful lest you drop your basket which is on your back
could you bring us firewood tomorrow?
I caught him on time just before he fell back on his back
would you dare to go alone?
why don't you say it if you dare!
my child cannot be consoled, it keeps crying
I cannot be comfortably happy in foreign country
our horse has been domiciled
you child stop crying ("your child is comfortably happy now")
since I cannot be comfortably happy in Myanmar, I went to the States
I dare you on any situation ("I dare as much as you dare")
I dare you by myself alone
please try to console the child which is weeping
he is a great man
this friend of mine has a big head
his greatness is shown in his love
if you can wait please wait for me
if you can wait please wait for me
he is very healthy
health is the most important thing for human beings
if you have pain or suffering, please consult the doctor
who will deliver us from our pains and suffering?
he is so surprised that he is just bewildered
he shot a deer but missed
your missing the mark is due to your bad eye sight
please leave some meat for me
we left three persons behind
our food is gritty with sands in it
my granpa snored at night
after our cat-mother snarled last night I was unable to fall asleep
would you please return to the village for awhile?
Pe◦ter was once a fisherman
have you ever listen to a song that said, we built temporatry huts among monkeys and giddons
our hill tops are bald and barren
my father is bald ("my father's forehead is bald")
we are going for a hike at Ngatainu hill
he seems to get wiser since he got bald
do you know the meaning of the saying "my little finger and my father's thigh are of the same size"
are you almost of your father's size?
you should divide the field equally between you
the post you erected is askew
your post is crooked
he is having headache and therefore limp (keeping quiet)
if your house post is askew your house will not stand strong
after he was limp because of his headache he no longer wanted to do anything
he is a quiet person
if you are to quiet you will not have friends
a swine grunts
have you stopped drinking?
I have stopped gambling
my shirt is dirty (i.e. it's stain is hard to clean)
if your trousers are dirty, you better wash it soon
he has been chronically sick with dysentry (i.e. he has chronic dysentry)
I am almost as big as my father
most of the students have left for home
he read almost everything which is necessary to read
a bird perches on a branch
I have a house
the owner of this boat is Mr Thang Cem
he has a lot of wealth
my having of a pony is now only one year/it's only a year since I have a pony
just wealth and fame should not matter when looking for a spouse
I heard the squeal of a pig
donot cut around the pole too deep lest it breaks
a vine constricted our wallnu tree that it broke
be careful when you cut around the pole!
why was it that my son died (and not others)?
his hand is too stained with dirt that he brushed it with a stone
donot ask for too much marriage price
please do not ask too much things to your uncles
they will not be happy if you asked them too much stuff
he is so fastidious that it is hard for his friends
those who think only for themselves they often don't know whether they are fastidious or not
a creeper entwines a mango tree
they way to your house is very curvy
she is such a person who turns this way and that way that we cannot understand his thinking
because they way the paved the road is too curvy car accidents happened alot
our post is getting rotten
a cat mews
our clothes become dirty from smoke
we were finished as smoke dirtied our things
align the books properly
is he spying on the enemies?
donot rip off the stalk of the orange if you want to keep it long
hold the cup with the handle
he is distraught staying inside the house (i.e.he stays at home without saying much on anything)
he never provokes any body
please do not start to fight with me all the time!
it's not good to nag one another
let there be no nagging between husband and wife
if youy look into it closely you would surely see it
he took a good aim at the dove and shot it down
the Cauca sians are white, and the Chinese are fair
my father skin was so fair that people took him for Chinese
he is a stupid; he is a dull person
have you stopped smoking?
he is chronically sick from malaria
after he was chronically sick following his illness he died
you should not be dozing in the church
my sandals last me a long time
my yesterday's drink made me to have a hang on today
my tiredness of yesterday hangs on me today
she weeps bitterly
silver coins
you should pay tax regularly
tax collector
our dog growls
if you doze while some one is preaching, it's a shame
I will beat you
are you going now?
please lend me your book
none of your business!
have you fallen asleep yet?
I have two water buffaloes for tilling the fields
a film of fat has been smeared on the table
egg membrane is very fragile
soot of the pot has been smeared on the arm of your shirt
do you also want to eat?
if you are good, others also are good
she is pretty because her hair is black
the reason why the table is black is due to smoke
it's not good to be jealous of others
we should not have jealousy over others
our exam is near
he is our close relative
are you almost ready yet?
you don't seem to comb your hair, its so unruly?
The old house is not fit for habitation
A habitual reader reads and reads
A wise man is superior to flattery
when we get close to our village our walking became more enthusiastic
we are getting close to the village now
we take rest in the sahe of a tree
every country needs good politics
put the table and chairs close
he is our close relative
although he is sick he goes to school
she did not pick up the phone although she was there
will you tell it about me? Not at all!
do you want to drink liquor? not at all!
their group were composed of laughing and crying people
when the monkeys dam the river for catching fish, they were called 'group of gatherers and dismantlers'
his skin is smooth although he is black
I cut the wood with your knife
I caught fish with your net
love and wisdom
among faith and hope and love, the greatest is love
my table is smaller than your table
it is better if you stay rather than going away
the road is very slippery
because the road is slippery he slips and falls down
please smooth the krough surface of the floor
his coat got smeared with fat
we are plastering our wall
we cut meat with knife
one morning Thawng Ceu was pushing a cart, they said
please massage (press) my back
a tiger springs on the pigs and catches one
the soldiers attacked one village
he was pushed over the precipice and he fell down
I really missed the time when my love massage (press) my back
the carcase has bad smell
this guy is too cocky (i.e., he is 'son of a bitch')
because your body smell so bad we all get dizzy
a mouse was crushed on the road and its give us bad odors really bad
don't you be in a hurry
you will not be ahead of time just because you are in a hurry
do you know how to count numbers?
number one
counting numbers
number thirty
number one thousand
number ten thousand
one hundred thousand
number one million
number ten million
number one hundred million
number one billion
number one hundred billion
have you taken your meal?
are these your books?
you (plural) please do it
are you going too?
your floor is quite greasy
I almost slips over because your floor is too greasy
he is my younger one
she is their baby sitter
he is a much younger person than me
they have a child
when I have a child with Sung Hlei Hniang, we will name her Sung Hlei
he sings her child to sleep with the song of a lullaby
they had a baby recently
in our country cradles are made with cane
she puts to sleep her baby with a lullaby
your father might surpasses me in age, I don't know (I might be a bit younger than your father)
I think I surpass you in age (I am a bit older than you)
they cleansed her womb
you should never look down upon others
you should never have a contempt on any body
she wears a ring on her ring finger
there was a flood in the days of Noah
the banks of the river are covered with mud
the road is muddy
Peng Hlei pa, the beef you bought has a lot of tendon in it !
have you kneaded the dough?
could he have really committed murder?
don't you singe my hand with pine torch
you should tuck your shirt into your trousers
he slipped the picture between the pages of the book
they dipped the living coals into the water
it is bad to give bribes
you will get addicted if you take bribery
the water is muddy
the water is muddy that fish cannot be seen
the turbid flood water makes the river muddy
please slip the firebrand underneath the ashes
as for going to school or not, it is my wish
government officers issued many orders
if you have a passport you have the permission to go to other countries
let it be according to your will
go and ask him !
I request him to give me a job
I asked him to forgive me
he aplogized me so much that i forgave him again
Lord Jesus intercedes for us that God may forgive our sins
have you received my letter of request?
the ten commandments
the county officer issued an order not to cut down trees
he is an obedient person
obey your parents
it is good to obey parents
please repeat what you said
I shall go again
he said repeatedly what he had said
he is respectful to people
can you give him permission to go to Myanmar?
he did not allow me to go to Myanmar
he does not allow me to to go Myanmar
when we have too much fun, we should also be careful not to overdo it
it is good to have fun
why don't you quit your job if you don't have fun in it!
pleasure is what human beings like
he wants to go back to Myanmar somewhat
my grandmother mashed potatoes
I would like to eat mashed potatoes
chang na nawn ah◦cun kan bawmh lai
the cart was stuck on the road because the road was muddy
it is absolutely bad to commit murder
watch out lest you singe me with your torch
a horse is sinking in the mud
he makes bread for me
our garden is covered with mud
what you said confused them
it is difficult for cars to go in the mire
you behavior sicken me (i.e., I am sick and tired of your behavior)
I also rebuked him severely because I was so sick of him
the elephants used its trunk to move logs
let us push our work forward
you should not let your work get slow/to slow down
(you have to go away, then) just go away yourself, my love!
I am tired of pork
you made me sick !
what gender is the deer you shot, is it a female or a male deer?
there is no more elks in our country
sambur horns are valuable
we tract the buck from its footprints
your shirt is smeared with grease
the fact that he smeared me wih his snot was because he looked down on me
we came back to the beginning of our trail
I am so poor that I could not own a house
do you have a wife ?
do you want to have friends?
what food do you have?
it is not possible to get used to pain
you take advantage of me because of my ignorance
do you have change ?
landscape of Kale valley
this mattress is soft
people like him because he is gentle
if your mattress is too soft, your back might be painful
he speaks softly
after I got sick of him, I don't even want to look at him
I have been disgusted with him for a long time
it is not good to shove dirt to the corner and leave it there
we shall have our meal when you have mashed the potatoes
I also went to the wine press
Press him to go to school
do'nt you have any left over food ?
a rock fell on him and he died
he died because a rock fell on him/he died from being struck by a rock
I weighted down the papers with paper weight
people do not trust them because they weight measure they use is short of standard
the weight measure they use is short of the standard
in the end he was justified
sun is our mother, moon our father, earth our grandmother, sky our grandfather
we bask in the warmth of the sun
God was walking in the garden of Eden in the cool of the day
calendar
our village is three days' journey from here
he goes to school every other day/on alternate days
she is my aunt
he is happy and he laughs
Zacchaeus is a short person
low hills surround our village
you should not look down on him just because he is short
they were so happy that they were in laughter
you may shorten the post by one foot
that couple are very different in their height
the sun rises in the east
we will begin our journey just after sun rise (at the dawn)
the sun rise late in our village
we arrived home just after sunrise
we arrived home just after sunrise
you will go to the east
we shall set out at the dawn
the sun has risen
it is wonderful to watch the rising sun
the heat of the sun which has just risen is not strong
Chins of former days were fearful of eclispse of sun
we must trust in God for our every day life
we should pray daily
my love, I always think about you daily
your grandfather has not been changed that much, i.e. he has been the way that he was
it is best when things are the way the should be, they said
according to my wish ("the way that I want it"), we may leave tomorrow
the grains of this board is pretty
I really got tired of his behavior now
please let me carry your book for you!
every thing has their own pattern
we are better off now than before
our condition is pretty good these days
we are quite well off this year/prosperous
he is an arrogant person
nobody like him because he is so overbearing
everybody hates him because he is too arrogant
I would be very rich too if I were a king
had I gone to Falam I could have seen him
he is never afraid
they were so alarmed because they were haunted by ghost
he should be ashamed for what he did
I have no shame nor embarrassment for being a Christian
feeling shame is the most painful kind among pains
what you have done was shameful and embarrassing
he embarrassed when he thought about how shameless he was
she is embarrassed
my gift is very small and worth very little, but please accept it for me
some girls are prettier when they laugh
we had such a laughter that we had tears
when they saw his performance they were laughing at him
my father shot and killed a deer
the students were taught their lessons by their teacher
please do not restrain yourself if you really want to laugh
I laughed so hard at what you said
they are cracking jokes and enjoying themsedlves
he is good at cracking jokes
he was participating in the cracking of the jokes
today is Sunday
they are having funs and they are in laughter
my daily wage is fifty kyats
you must not laugh at the disabled persons
the climate has been good this year and we have good harvest
the weather is going to be fine tomorrow
let us set out now, or else we shall be late for our journey
our trip this time is quite successful
when we do business there are days that we are not successful
he passed matriculation last year
the year before last
he has arrived in America four years back
we shall be arriving about 2 PM
he sustained the Israeli people with quails in the wilderness
lightning strikes in the sky
they have been quite well off for about three years
I was so sick and tired of it that I wanted to throw up
they have been well off that they could buy a car
she got sun stroke because she was wondering in the sun
he threw up because he got sun stroke
it looks like it is going to rain this morning
umbrella is necessaary in both rains and sunshine
days from Monday to Saturday are called weekdays
it was time for Iangku to give birth and she gave birth to a son
she gave birth to a son before it was time for her to give birth
in the winter the sun sets at about 5 pm
we arrived in our village at sunset
today the sun is shining well
during winter, we bask in the sun in the morning
it is good to put on a hat when you walk in the sunshine
we reached home when the sun set
they migrated to the west
Jesus is the same yesterday, today and tomorrow
today is a sacred day and I donot go to my field
yesterday I saw a young woman taking a walk
Sung Hlei pa is quite old but he is youthful
she is only a very young child
pears glut Hakha market
immerse your shirt in the water
he repeated again and again what he has said
I shall go again
I will repeat it again
we shall go to the amusement park
they forgot everything because they were too happy themselves
the story he told amused the children
I chose to live where I can have fun
when the fruits glut at the market, their price came down too
cow dung is good manure
an elephant has two trunks
I am tired of his talk
if you are so tired of pork why don't you try chicken
did you see the elephant that pushed the logs ?
let us strive forward!
let us do what we can do for our country
if we are so slow in our work, we will not finish our job
meat of female chicken is more delicious than that of male chicken
there are seven women here
SungNgen is his mother
I will never forget the words of my beloved mother
it is very difficult to have one million
it is all the more difficult to have ten million kyats
as for me Hakha is the most pleasant place in the world
are you happy at your work ?
his jokes amused us
the reason why your house is pleasant is because it is on a knoll
it is possible to have fun with sports
they were so happy that tears were dropped
his speech is slow
her father scolded her and therefore she sulked by not eating food
the students are on strike
she sulked so many times that they do not want to comfort here anymore
he was walking so slow that he made us late
being a gay or lesbian does not seem happen by choice
step mother can be good too
our step mother loved us very much
we live because we eat food
all living things praise God
your cubs are so lovely
murderers are very scary
now they can live well
he caught two fish alive
we ought to look after the widows and orphans
I dare everything if I were to live with you
my love, I don't want to live anymore on this earth without you
your life will be long because you came when we talked about you
Dar Mang attitude is good
she is not as pretty as she is lovely
your help makes us alive
as they live better, their lives also became ea sier
their livelihood has been pretty good
his life span was eighty years
respect for parents is a very important feature in Chin culture
to love neighbors was empha sized by our parents
both of them, husband and wife, are educated people
girls usually have menstruation around age fifteen
I have a very beautiful wife
Solomon had many concubines
he will get married next month
if you want to get married you should save some money
I also went to the marriage of my friend
honey, you have come
SuiṬha is a married woman
have you not got to become married woman yet, my friend !
I donot feel like dancing after being married
it is said in Chin proverb that motherhood is sweet and fatherhood is dry
in any case, it is better for him to go rather than not to go
we will rest at the shade
his head injury makes him to be dazed from time to time
do you still remember while we are participating together in the expedition of catching fish?
I have not washed for a long time and my body is stained with dirt
after he was sick chornically he did not live very long
we are late because you are too slow
because his cat mewed too much at night they killed it for him
his behavior got better after they let him stay home distraught
if you don't stop smoking you will get lung disease
your dog growled at me
if we continue to push forward we will succeed oneday
a blow on the head dazed him
I am going to school
he admitted his mistake
I have no more hope over this matter
different kinds of people have different way of popularizing things
is he happier because he is popular?
gold is more precious than silver
dandruff make our head itchy
he is anointed with oil at his vortex
he joins the army
he enters into the house
the fontanel of baby is very soft
Mizo were called Lusei in earlier time
our skulls are pretty hard
he wears a turban
he went in haste
I cut off part of our meat which was infested with maggots and threw away
dry your meat properly lest it might be spoiled and filled with maggots
he is such a good speaker that I believed naively what he said
since our meat is full of maggots, I threw it away
our meat is full of maggots
your enemies might do something to trip you over
if you trip over something you might have your foot broken
if you stumble you may hurt your self
he gets malaria and is falling in bed
he will trips so many more times since he is a child
he stumbles over a stone
my mom warmed me a pot of sweet tea
be careful when you warm water
please warm the rice
we will go to the river after the weather got warmer
it is warm today
our ancestors worshipped Lulpi
he falls in somersault
there are many flowers in our garden
it will be vacation time for school in no (significant) time
he washed the dishes improperly
he went there to learn somewhat but I doubt he had learned anything
he is a person of no signifcance
please put on a cap/hat
the Chin crown ornament is woven of feathers
there is glory on his vortex
I donot know the entrance into your house
after he joined the army we no longer heard about him
she speaks many undesirable things in her sorrow
she is deep in sorrow for the death of her friend
if you are too gullible, they will always deceive you
he is a gullible man and he will believe anything that they say
he is as intelligent as cunning
he has a sharp mind
although I have been trying to satisfy him he cannot be pleased
if you can please them they will love you
you should try to please others
they cannot find any one who pleases them
what he said did not please them
please do tell me if you are not satisfied with what I did
the way you taught is very satisfactory
I am very satisfied with what you have done
does alum really have a sour taste?
it is hard to believe in you since you change you mind so many times
although he was tortured he never wavered
he is a fickle minded person/he changes his mind very often
the words he spoke make me enthusiastic about my work
he is very enthusiastic about his work
I secretly miss you greatly
it is very difficult to convert from Buddhism to Christianity
my father converted from animism to Christianity
I am going to tell you this for an advice
I am thank you for couselling me
I am thankful that you advised me
he is a good man
he said like that because most probably he had an unclean conscience about the matter
he said like that because most probably his conscience was not clear about the matter
the news of his death saddened me
we are anxious about our friends who went to the river as it has been raining rather heavily
donot have any disappointment with me as what I did was the best I could
what you have done is not quite satisfactory
even if you are not satisfied what else can you do
I am very disappointed ("not satisfied") with what I have done in the exam
I appreciate your preaching very much
I am very satisfied with what you have done
please be patient with me